1-1. My prostrations to the resplendent Lord Narayana, the prime abode of
every auspicious attribute, the efficient cause of all existence, the master of
(Goddess) Mahalakshmi and Mukhyaprana and similar in splendour to the
early rising sun.

1-2. (This verse admits of two meanings, as the adjectives are so chosen that
they apply both to Lord Vedavyasa and Lord Krishna.)
 a) My salutations to Lord Vedavyasa (Vasista-Krishna) dear to Bhīma
(Pandavas, the consorts of Droupadi) who scintillated with the lustre of his
dark blue-colour like that of a cloud, safeguarding the eternal Vedas in its
immaculate form.
b) My respectful homage to Lord Krishna (Yadava-Krishna), highly honoured
by the Pandavas who dazzled with his dark-blue colour similar to that of a
cloud, guarding Gokula and the herds of cows, free from fear (of the fierce
animals).

1-3. May the glory of Anandatheertha who excels the splendour of the Sun
endow us with light divine. The sun can only light the three worlds and
removes the outer darkness while Acharya Madhwa shines outside the
universe also and dissipates the ignorance within.

1-4. Obeisance to my revered father, Acharya Trivikrama the renowned
pundit, whose precious volume Tatwapradeepa dispels the darkness and
yields delight like the moon dispersing the gloom and pleasing the people
with her pleasant light (rays).

1-5. I will relate the splendid spotless glories of the incarnations of
Mukhyaprana, the preceptor of the world, for the welfare of the eligible souls
as an intense devotion to the Guru (whose instruction) leads to the incessant
love of God (Lord Mukunda).

1-6. May the meritorious be merciful to me who not so wise, ventures to
describe in brief the celebrated excellences of Lord Vayu, fit to be detailed in
dignified Vedic parlance by eminent divines like Mahesha, Devendra and
others.

1-7. How to pick and choose among the wonderful and unique deeds of
Mukhyaprana when every human activity however great or small is being
propelled and regulated by him? Yet, enough to say that the recital of the
glories of the illustrious who are like crest-jewels ennobles our minds.
(Makes our lives sublime)

1-8. Let the enlightened excuse me who void of deep vision is yet zealous to
weave a garland of pearls in the form exquisite exploits of Lord Vayu,
unmindful of the transgression of sequence in the events described.

1-9. Implicitly obeying the mandate of Lord Narayana (beloved of Goddess
Mahalakshmi) deserving to be highly honoured by the three Worlds and
respecting the earnest entreaties of the eminent Gods like Mahadeva and
others, Mukhyaprana the prime-mover of infinite Jivas, the lord of the
Presiding deities of various organs like Indra and others, the preceptor of the
eligible souls manifested as the son of Anjanadevi, the wife of the monkeychief Kesari.

1-10. All the renowned qualities (like knowledge and devotion) celebrated in
the world indicate the lustrous son of Kesari (incarnation of Mukhyaprana)
the distinguished devotee of Lord Narayana called Hanuman, as their
outstanding exemplar.

1-11. Performing extra-ordinary deeds extolled in the councils of divine, the
intimate companion of King Sugriva (Hanuman) saw Lord Narayana, the
consort of Goddess Mahalakshmi embodied as Lord Ramachandra whose
very sight sanctifies the universe.

1-12. Hanuman, the monkey-chief bent with (the burden of) ardent devotion
bowed to the charming feet of the primeval Person Lord Ramachandra who
with great love raised him up with his soft, lovely arms.

1-13. Lord Ramachandra, the rival of the demon Madhu, who rent the row of
(seven) Sal trees (with a single arrow) never unriven by others and slayed
valorous Vali, the son of Indra (with one pointed missile) greatly gladdened
Sugriva, the son of the Sun (by coronating him) and sent the valiant
Hanuman in search of Sita-Akrati (form) realizing his precious qualities.

1-14. [This verse admits two meanings] - Lord Ramachandra, proficient in
warfare sent lustrous Hanuman, the terror of foes and the friend of the
virtuous calling him close to the ear (to impart a secret message), in search
of Sita:
Resplendent Hanuman resembled a radian sharp arrow released by Lord
Ramachandra in full force (pulling the bow-string to his ear) dreadful to the
rivals but defending the righteous.

1-15. Hanuman with his honeyed words made the Sita (form) intensely
happy (by delivering the sweet message) and singing the horde of demons
with the fire in his tail and crossing the sea, bowed to the benevolent feet of
Lord Ramachandra like a new water-laden cloud cheering the herbs with its
showers, burning the thickets with its lighteni

1-16. It is indeed surprising in the three worlds that Hanuman, valiant in
deeds, impartial in judgement (flying without wings), a born bachelor (not
given to the pleasures of senses) who bore Lord Ramachandra (the bearer
of Brahmanda) and Lakshmana on his arms vanquished Garuda, who flies
with wings, subsists on serpents and carries only Lord Ramachandra (not
Lakshmana) on his shoulders, in speed and valour.

1-17. This Hanuman built a bridge on the sea that quaked with the sportive
movement of the eyebrows of Lord Ramachandra, the foremost of the
Raghu race and gave a big blow (on the chest of Ravana) with his firm fist,
as a condign reply for cruelty threatening Goddess Sita.

1-18. Hanuman was the Adhvaryu (the officiating priest) in the blazing
sacrifice of war burning bright with the fire (anger of Lord Ramachandra),
Sugriva the Yajamana (patron) and Lakshmana the Pratisprastatru (Rutvik).

1-19. The fatigue felt in picking and conveying flowers to Lord Ramachandra
with his two hands for his worship was not experienced by the indefatigable
Hanuman when he extirpated and carried the majestic Gandhamadhana
mountain (fifty thousand miles distant) on one arm.

1-20. Hanuman followed the Supreme Person, Lord Ramachandra (to
Ayodhya) who put to death his dread foes Ravana and his ilk and was
accompanied by Goddess Sita, the daughter of the king Janaka after her
miraculous chastity-test by her (willing) entry into fire yet coming out
unscathed, sparkling like a purified golden necklace.

1-21. Hanuman served with devout devotion this embodiment of Lord
Narayana, (Lord Ramachandra) with his lustrous blue colour, fascinating
(lotus-like) eyes and pleasing smile, with long arms and imposing gait like
that of the elephant-king Airavata, whose very sight brings good luck in
diverse ways.

1-22. After Lord Ramachandra was coronated as king of Ayodhya, Goddess
Sita under the pretext of presenting a precious pearl-necklace to Hanuman
with the mandate of her consort to dower it to their dearest devotee, blessed
Hanuman with ever-lasting mercy.

1-23. Lord Ramachandra intensely pleased with the unstinted service and
unflinching devotion of Hanuman, with a heart overwhelmed with deep
affection, with eyes overflowing with mercy lauded him with sweet (nectarlike) words placing his blessed hand on his head and granted him (the
highest boon) Sahabhoga (‘a consummation devoutly to be wished’).

1-24. There was none other than Hanuman who was so dear to Rama, nor
anything scarce in the realm of Ramachandra; even then Hanuman craved
not for earthly pleasures but earnestly sought an ardent attachment to His
blissful feet: Really Hanuman is renunciation personified.

1-25. ‘Oh Lord; accept my respectful salutations: oh master; I reverently bow
to your feet time and again: what a pleasure to kneel before you?’so
exclaimed Hanuman in ecstasy.

1-26. Who can depict the paramount grace of Lord Ramachandra the
consort of Goddess Sita that rained on Hanuman the foremost of the
monkeys? While departing to Vaikunta, leaving the earth, He gave Himself
(remained with him in one Rupa) (Form) to his devout disciple for his daily
worship.

1-27. This Hanuman, even now abides in Kimpurushakhanda respectly
adoring Lord Ramachandra, the consort of Goddess Sita, deeply immersed
in the sacred recital of his life-glories that enable the earnest devotees to
secure their innate bliss.

1-28. Bhimsena proclaimed by the wise to be the second incarnation of the
same Lord Vayu (the first being Hanuman) was born to Kunti, the consort of
Panduraja with the mere affectionate touch of Lord Vayu.


1-29. It is really surprising that in days of yore, Devendra had to use
deliberately his thunderbolt to prune the wings of the mountains because the
child Bhimsena accidentally falling down from the hands of his mother Kunti
on the (Shatasringa) mountain could cleave it with the mere contact of his
body. (More powerful than Indra’s thunderbolt).

1-30. In the bygone days Bhimasena seeing the princely lads wearied during
their light games at Hastinapura, recollected with great curiosity his juvenile
games when he sported with lions and slayed them too.

1-31. Bhimasena consciously enough consumed and digested the poisoned
fare ministered to him by his foes Duryodhana and others, destroyed the
cluster of venomous serpents arranged to kill him and easily came out of the
perilous eddy called Pramanakoti: of course nothing strange with him, who is
the very life-breath of (all beings).

1-32. Seeing the lac-house on fire Bhimasena emerged out of the concealed
den bearing his brothers on his shoulders and smothered his adversary the
demon Hidambi, an accomplishment acclaimed by the deities and
approached Lord Vedavyasa who manifested then to exhort him to accept
Hidambi in marriage like a mystic incinerating his physical frame with his
intense spiritual strength and reaching the Supreme with the fruit of
meritorious deeds, like a spy escaping the enemy’s camp with some
contrivance and joining his master in safety.

1-33. The wise Bhimasena of immaculate mind, in a spirit of deep devotion
dedicated all the virtuous valiant deeds done so far to Lord Vedavyasa and
resolved to consign all the meritorious feats to be accomplished as worship
at the feet of his master.


1-34. Then, Bhimasena sheltered in Lord Vishnu slaughtered the demon
Baka and defeated the inimical kings and strictly sticking to his own tenets
secured Droupadi like the king-swan flying in the sky with its fascinating
wings, winning the queen-swan, (killing the crane and putting other rival
birds to flight).

1-35. Bhimasena was greatly gratified to behold Lord Krishna, the beloved
son of his maternal uncle Vasudeva beaming with his radiant (moon-like)
face excelling the beauty of the blue lotus, with his fascinating eyes and
pleasing smile, whom he saw after a long interval in Droupadi’s choicemarriage.

1-36. Not long hence, Bhimasena accompanied by his brother Arjuna (son of
Indra) and Lord Krishna slayed Jarasandha, Brahadratha’s son a fierce
fighter on earth with his mighty mace and vanquished Kichaka and other
felons having big chariots who were brave enough to split great mountains
and thus, enabled king Dharmaraja to perform the celebrated Rajasuya
Sacrifice.

1-37. Bhimasena gathered together the dishevelled soft, black and curly hair
of his wife Panchali roughly pulled by Dusshasana (brother of Duryodhana)
intending to kill his rival Kouravas, like an expert collecting the pliable,
winding and sable serpents agonized by a relentless rogue specialized in
incantations (like Garuda Mantra etc.) wishing to use them to smother his
enemies.

1-38. The demons Kirmira and his ilk, dreadful to the human beings dwelling
in the forest succumbed to the righteous indignation of the wolf-bellied
Bhimasena in exile, scintillating in all effulgence (intending to lighten the
burden of mother earth) like the bright wild-fire burning the wood with its
trees, thickets and ruthless animals like lions and tigers.

1-39. Bhimasena massacred the numerous red-eyed, mighty, jealous
demons known as Krodhavashas voicing untruth and indulging in excessive
pleasures strolling in the Gandhamadhana Mountain torturing the virtuous
with Maniman as their leader, like the forest-fire that burns the sinewy,
merciless double-tongued serpents with jewels in their hoods, crawling in the
hills to the dread of the innocents.

1-40. Like the smouldering fire burning ablaze with the blowing wind and
incinerating the vociferous cluster of reeds standing stretched in all
directions, Bhimasena (son of Lord Vayu) came out of his non-cognition
period where he lay concealed as a cook and manifested his extraordinary
might by destroying the impregnable, vile-tongued multitude of one hundred
and six fierce felons known as Kichakas that had blocked the aspirations of
the righteous.

1-41. The invincible Bhimasena bearing his big mace, accompanied by
Arjuna towing the path shown by Sri Krishna, dazzled by demolishing time
and gain the enemy forces glowing with the terrific resplendence of mighty
warriors like Bhismacharya, Dronacharya and others like the intolerable fire
with its fiery flames razing the dreadful forest full of fierce animals.

1-42. Bhimasena, sporting with varied arms, exterminating the brave enemy
camps that had stayed from the path of righteousness, burning with anger
and hate and grown timid having lost the support of mighty warriors (like
Bhishma and Drona), glistened with the glory of his conquest like the wild
fire blazing with its rapid spreading flames, destroying the wood replete with
wild animals and birds grown nervous with their nests charred and their
wings burnt in their effort to cross the rising flames.

1-43. The dauntless Bhimasena devoted to the blissful feet of Sri Krishna
(an ideal Bhakta), the beloved consort of Panchali (an Ideal husband), the
supreme benevolent ruler delighting his subjects (an Ideal king) shone along
with his brothers as a luminary, like the bee attached to the flowers, like the
King-Swan loving the lotus and like the Sun blooming the row of lotuses
(respectively).

1-44. Bhimasena and his brothers gathering world-wide fame entrusted their
extensive empire to their grandson and also the grandson of Subhadra the
sister of Sri Krishna Parikshitraja, a sanctifying name (Pavitra) afflicting the
minds of their adversaries and attained their true states (Mularupa) bearing
Lord Mukunda in their hearts.

1-45. Hammered by Bhimasena (Lord Vayu) serving devotedly (the feet of)
Lord Krishna, the horde of demons perished in the battle being renderedlustreless and unsteady like a cluster of clouds in the middle of the sky
losing their density and direction being scattered by the fierce wind.

1-46. These (vindictive) demons shorn of sheen, so vexed and smothered
(being born again to take revenge on him) but incompetent to confront
Bhimasena with physical force, cleverly (decided to) compose a formidable
rival-Shastra condign to their nature denying auspicious qualities to Lord
Narayana, to tease him out of thought (to distress his mind).


1-47. The depraved knave with his deep ingrained ill-will against Bhimasena,
slain in the past (Dwapara Age) by him in the Sougandhika flower venture,
was born again as Mayavada-pravarthaka at Kaladi propitiating Maheshwara
by penance and earning the boon of eloquence: likewise were other demons
reborn out of sheer rivalry.

1-48. The Sinful Mayavada-Pravarthaka took to the study of scriptures like a
cat with suppressed intentions stealing the sacrificial offering like a dog
intent on impious stuff snatching the sacred oblation and like a fickle monkey
mis-managing a necklace of pearls.

1-49. ‘Otherwise (If I do not take to the fourth order) the people will not pay
their homage to me,’so thinking the perfidious Mayavada-Pravarthaka
accepted asceticism like an intoxicated elephant profaning the pure waters
of a lotus-lake. (Embarrassing those who want to have a plunge in it).

1-50. Discerning that the (Mahayana) Buddhist doctrine was controverted
and declared as hostile to the Vedas by the Vedantins and desiring to
propagate the same principles being himself its willing partisan, he
(Mayavada-Pravarthaka) devised a proper plan.

1-51. As the wicked Mayavada-Pravarthaka under a different terminology
disseminated the same principles, his doctrine came to be designated as
disguised Buddhism: He termed the Asat and (Agnana) Samvriti of the
Buddhists as Sadasad Vilakshana and Maya respectively and named the
Shunya as Akhanda Brahma.

1-52. As Mayavada-Pravarthaka filched the cluster of Brahmasutras that
determine the nature of Brahman by their critical correct scrutiny of the
Vedas and illumine their cardinal principles and distorted them with his own
canons at will, he came to be reckoned as a renowned robber. A venture
similar to one stealing the resplendent Sun with radiant rays, (and with his
chariot drawn by swift horses) illuming the universe.

1-53. Really Lord Narayana, in his embodiment as Lord Vedavyasa is
endurance incarnate who did not intend to incinerate Mayavad-Pravarthaka
parading himself as a commentator providing an adverse commentary to his
bunch of Brahmasutras.

1-54. The illumination of the immaculate Vedas came to be shadowed by the
Wizardry of words marshalled in the unscrupulous commentary of
Mayavada-Pravarthaka like the glow of a group of gems concealed in the
slough: as a result he was named as Mayavada-Pravarthaka, as he had
corrupted the Vedic meanings that can easily beguile (even today) the unenlightened.


1-55. The Asuras on earth publicized their doctrine in all directions
highlighting that the world is an illusion, Brahman is without attributes and
there is no difference between Jiva and Paramatma and as a consequence,
alas! The Supreme Narayana replete with distinguished qualities like bliss
and knowledge became slowly masked in the minds of the virtuous.

2-1. With the setting of the spiritual sun due to the influence of the Kali age
and the dire darkness of the hostile doctrines shrouding the eligibles and
deviating them from the traditional tracks, the distressed deities led by
Brahmaji approached Lord Vishnu for protection.

2-2. The supreme Lord known as Trihuti (descending on earth only in Krita,
Treta and Dwapara ages) not desirous of incarnating in the Kali age, and
with Brahmaji having no manifestation on earth and finding no other allknowing competent deity capable of discharging the assigned deed,
commanded with a pleasant smile Lord Vayu, the very life-breath of all human beings.

2-3. Oh auspicious one! Embellish the earth with your embodiment as
Acharya Madhwa and delight the divine society of eligible souls rendered
pathetic, devoid of defence, deserving our mercy, being distressed not to
discern the definite import of the scriptures, with the correct interpretation of
the Brahmasutras full of merits and destitute of defects.

2-4. Mukhyaprana, with folded hands, carrying with reverence on his head
the precious crown of command of his master consisting of priceless words,
bearing the plea of the Gods Mahadeva and others in mind like a necklace
of pearls desired to incarnate on earth to bless his dear devotees.

2-5. At the same time (when the Gods entreated the Supreme Lord) the
assemblage of the eligibles on earth belonging to different orders in dire
distress, unable to comprehend the distilled essence of the traditional
doctrine, expressed in anguish ‘alas! How can we attain salvation’?

2-6. To please the virtuous and to convey the happy news of the descent of
Lord Vayu on earth, Ananteshwara entered the body of a person in the huge
crowd moving in great merriment, (collected on this significant festive
occasion at Udupi).


2-7. To convince his devotes, Lord Ananteshwara (deliberately) possessed a
person, by nature a dunce who climbed to the top of the high flag-post and
began to dance with graceful bodily gestures like an actor on the stage, to
the admiration of the audience.

2-8. Addressing the public, Lord Ananteshwara (through the person he had
entered into) voiced on oath in a sonorous prophetic tone: ‘Presently, an
illustrious, pre-eminent, omniscient person beneficent in behaviour will be
born on earth (to oblige the virtuous)’

2-9. There lived a Brahmin born in the pure Madhyageha family,
embellishing it as its crest-gem in the Kali age in Bharatadesha, the land of
fulfilment, in Jambudwipa in the middle of the earth consisting of seven
islands and seven seas.

2-10. The village Shivalli, highly embellished by both Vedachala hill and Lord
Ananteshwara, scintillating like the resplendent Ilavrita region beautified by
Mahadeva and the Meru Mountain was the birth-place of this Brahmin.

2-11. This Brahmin the foremost in the three famous families Parpadane,
Vadappe and Kabekude did abide in the pure place called Pajaka, having a
perennial source of water with the blessing of the Supreme Lord, where Lord
Parashurama installed Goddess Durga, the sister of Lord Sri Krishna, who
glistens like a wreath on the majestic Vimanagiri Hill, the summit (head) of
Pajaka (Kshetra).

2-12. This Brahmin, who learnt under the guidance of an able preceptor the
Veda-Vidya consisting of imperishable words propagating the Supremacy of
Lord Narayana, dispensing deliverance to deserving souls, was given in
marriage by another Brahmin a beautiful bride decked with golden
ornaments befitting in age, conduct and family dignity, chaste enough to
bear the precious issue (Madhwacharya) capable of yielding salvation, the
main objective of life.

2-13. The extremely discreet, eminent Brahmin, immensely devoted to Lord
Vishnu, of pure mind and senses and devoid of arrogance sported with his
innocent, chaste and devout wife, well suited to give birth to the son
Anandatirtha like the judicious obtaining joy from the holy Upanishads, like
the sacred soul securing intense happiness with his devotion to Lord Hari
and like the philosopher deriving immense pleasure in his innate bliss in
salvation.

2-14. The highly religious Brahmin of a stead-fast mind and subdued senses
who had known the secrets of Mahabharata and the Puranas, serving with
great devotion the feet of his family God Lord Anantasana, was called as
‘Bhatta’ by the people.

2-15. Madhyagehabhatta not only pleased the ear and senses of the
devotees by his sweet (nectar-like) charming narration of stories of Lord
Narayana but also gratified the Gods who served the blessed feet of Lord
Ananteshwara (consort of Goddess Mahalakshmi) at Udupi.

2-16. Though being contented with the telling of the interesting stories of
Lord Narayana, the prudent Madhyagehabhatta, with his intellect refined and
sharpened by the study (listenings) of the scriptures, yet under the evil
influence of the Kali age, and the Mayavadins persisting in the propagation
of the attributeless Brahman with a vacillated mind regarding the real nature
of supreme cogitated thus.

2-17. ‘By what means can we beget an omniscient offspring the very
embodiment of knowledge, shorn of all short-comings since a putra (Son)
worth the name can protect his parents from Punnama hell and one who is
not perfect can hardly do so (provide full protection)’?

2-18. ‘Let us fully surrender to Lord Narayana, our family God, an
embodiment of pure-knowledge and bliss, abounding in mercy as was done
in days of yore by Kardama Prajapati, sage Parasara and Panduraja to
procure a meritorious son, rich in precious qualities.’

2-19. Deeming so, relying on God as his only relative (with none other to rely
on except the divine), Madhyagehabhatta of immaculate mind, with immense
devotion that can extinguish the evil of existence incessantly served Lord
Anantasana, the giver of cherished gifts, for a (full) period of twelve years.

2-20. Thus they served the salutary feet of Sri Hari (Lord Anantasana) with
their scant joys of life made scantier, their subdued senses still more
subdued and sanctifying still more their sacred selves (by observing rigorous
religious rites).

2-21. The blessed couple desirous of begetting a meritorious son replete
with rich qualities pleased intensely Lord Anantasana full of auspicious
attributes, observing varied vows like fasting on milk as did sage Kasyapa
and Aditi in ancient days propelled by Brahmaji, to obtain an (omniscient)
offspring.

2-22. The satisfied Lord showered mercy on the couple and their desiccated
physical frames, beaming with great glow with the growing presence of Lord
Narayana and Goddess Mahalakshmi, attained great bodily purity with the
severity of their penance.

2-23. The contented and chaste wife conceived during her fertile period with
her eminent consort devoted to Lord Vishnu, a child (Madhwacharya) bereft
of blemishes for the welfare of the world, like the night begetting the moon in
autumn that dispels the darkness and floods the directions with light in the
clear sky (in the first half of the month).

2-24. While the consort of the distinguished Brahmin was about to give birth
to a child full-grown like the disc of the moon during the bright half of the
month, Mukhyaprana, in one form descended on earth and bowing to Lord
Narayana at Udupi, hied to the house of Madhyagehabhatta.

2-25. The illustrious Mukhyaprana, the master of the three Worlds entered
the pure embryo in the bright body of the wife of Madhyagehabhatta with its
nine glowing gates bearing all the (thirty-two) excellent marks, the abode of
Lord Vishnu, ousting the erstwhile abiding jiva like a victorious monarch
expelling a reigning ruler and making way through the lovely city with
beautiful mansions garnished with gates and charming doors (in all pomp
and splendour).

2-26. The solemn sound of the divine drums was heard by the gay people on
the globe as though relating: ‘Lord Vayu has incarnated on earth: Let the
righteous regale and the wicked wail.’


2-27. After serving Lord Anantasana at Udupi, just near his residence on his
way back when the wise Madhyagehabhatta listened to the sonorous sound
of the festive drum-beats and got the news of the birth of his son, his joy
knew no bounds and he realized that even indirect knowledge of objects
beyond the range of sight can be the source of satisfaction.

2-28. Entering the house, the religious Madhyagehabhatta intensely rejoiced
to see the fascinating face of his son and praised the merciful Mukunda
(Lord Narayana) and performed all the related birth-rites of his meritorious
child.

2-29. The father Madhyagehabhatta performing the naming ceremony called
the child, the embodiment of Lord Vayu incarnating for the enlightenment of
the eligibles, as Vasudeva a befitting name applauded even by the Gods
which connotes sound knowledge and deep devotion to the Supreme Lord.

2-30. The gift of a cow by one named Madillaya for feeding Vasudeva
(Acharya Madhwa) with milk led him to his deliverance, being born as an
issue of his own son and schooled in the scriptures by the magnanimous
Madhwacharya. Indeed, the worthier the recipient of a present the richer is
the fruit. [This verse highlights the importance of Sat-Patra-Dana (gifted
granted to the Vihias).]

2-31. The wise Madhyagehabhatta once carried his precious son similar in
brilliance to the bright moon and offered him as a present to his Lord
Ananteshwara (at Udupi) like one giving a priceless, perfect glowing gem to
one’s own master.

2-32. Kneeling before Lord Anantasana abiding at Udupi and praying for the
all-round prosperity of his son untouched by evil returned even during
midnight along with his child accompanied by relatives and others to his own
residence.

2-33. While moving through the dreary forest during the darkness of the
night when one among them being vexed by a spectre sporting there at ease
vomited blood, someone exclaimed in horror ‘God forbid! Some-how (as it is
its wont) it did not hurt the child Vasudeva’.

2-34. The apparition appearing in the person belching blood addressed:
‘though capable of killing you all who are passing through this forest during
midnight, our period of play, you are as yet safe and secure because of the
mighty child in your company (whom I dare not attack): Be not astonished:
Verily, he is the Lord of the universe.’

2-35. The nervous mother, unable to part with her son even for a short
period, once going out on some work entrusted him after feeding him to his
content to her daughter deeming her fit to guard the guardian of the globe.

2-36. The innocent girl tried to console with her indistinct artless words, the
child screaming aloud: ‘oh fair-faced one, your mummy will soon give you
what you like most, as much as you like: so shriek not again’.

2-37. With the child crying continuously and the mother not coming back for
a pretty long time, the bewildered girl grew more anxious and bore the child
in her arms looking out again and again for the arrival of her mother.

2-38. Not knowing what to do to confort the crying child, the girl thought a
while and gave well-boiled horse-gram to its content in place of cold milk that
the mother always used to cater lest it would catch fever with hot stuff.

2-39. The annoyed consort of the Brahmin accusing herself, ‘fie on me bereft
of mercy, busy in other’s duties: my child desirous of milk might be
ceaselessly crying for certain,’ reached her residence to see her son smiling
with his bulged belly.

2-40. Seeing the child calm and composed (to her surprise) the (anxious)
mother enquired and learnt all that had happened (during her absence) and
became greatly distressed being frightened of (the consequences) of the
(hot, hard) food swallowed by her son difficult to be digested even by adults
and sharply scolded her daughter (for her misdeed).

2-41. His (Vasudeva’s) mother was startled to see her child safe and sound
as before (even when treated with hard food) much unlike his real mother
Mahalakshmi (he being Lord Vayu) who was not even slightly stunned when
her mighty son drank deadly poison.

2-42. His mother, receiving the child fed him with milk again and again and
his father fondling him (with great affection) recited mantras that safeguard
from evil and the rest being pleased with his pleasant smile embraced him in
all earnestness.

2-43. The deity of Speech (worshipped by the world) shining with her
sparkling words commenced to sport on his (Vasudeva’s) tongue with great
delight in the form of indistinct prattle to start with, to the contentment of the
Gods and the virtuous long awaiting it, like Goddess Sarasvati getting into
the assembly of the expectant Gods initially unseen and then appearing
bashfully before Brahmaji.

2-44. The child Vasudeva, the incarnation of Mukhyaprana with whose grace
all activities in the universe are regulated began to crawl land tried to stand
up on his own and afterwards slowly stepped ahead by practice, only to
imitate the human beings.

2-45. One day, at day-break, Vasudeva walked out unseen by his people
holding the tail of his bull coming out of the cow-farm, wandering at will in the
woods grazing on green grass.

2-46. Vasudeva holding the tail of the beaming, big-bodied bull with its high
horns and fine apertures treading the earth with its broad feet, shone like the
early rising sun sheltered in some eastern part of the majestic mountain with
many dens and lofty peaks covering enough space.

2-47. The parents and relatives seeing not the lad in their midst and even
after a hectic search not finding him, being aggrieved in mind considered
thus: Is the boy who rambles at will, playing somewhere in the house? Has
he fallen in some well?’

2-48. When his kindred beheld the one year old boy coming back holding the
tail of the bull in the evening, then they believed the report of the cowherd of
the lad strolling in the forest (with the support of the bull’s tail).

2-49. The kith and kin who had missed the kid were exhilarated when they
got him back and considered it to be the blessings of Lord Anantasana.
Their pleasure was similar to a penniless person procuring the precious
chintamani pearl that bestows what one solicits and analogous to one
devoted to Lord Vishnu seeking liberation securing the spiritual path of
salvation.

2-50. One day after play when the (hungry) Vasudeva persuaded his
venerable father for the mid-day meal, he said slowly seeing his shining
face, ‘This creditor permits not me to partake food till the ox-sale-price is
paid’.

2-51. Then the son soon gave as many tamarind seeds in lieu of coins (due
to the creditor) with his soft playful hand with a pleasing smile and the rich
man respectfully received them and passed on saying that the price of the
ox was paid.

2-52. When the pick of Brahmins, after a few days, desired to pay the price
of the ox in real coins, the affluent (creditor) again affirmed ‘your son has
already paid’. It is amazing that Vasudeva, Lord Vayu in infant-form
delighted with the devotion of the dealer (ox-seller) under the pretext (of
having taken tamarind seeds in lieu of hard coins) favoured him with eternal
felicity – the supreme objective of life.
[The ox-seller who accepted the tamarind seeds with high esteem in
fulfilment of his payment became the recipient of Vasudeva’s favour, hard to
be attained. He was the divine touch that turned the tamarind seeds into
gold. Moved by his majesty that instilled deep- devotion in him (ox-seller)
(being a soul, noble by nature) and (gradually) with greater knowledge, he
attained eternal release. Such is the munificence of Acharya’s grace! This is
the explanation handed down by traditions, so stated Sri Sri Vidyamanyatirth
Swamiji, pontiff of Bhandarkeri and Phalimaru Mutts)

2-53. Thus this lad, the embodiment of Lord Vayu, the regulator of all lives,
like Sri Krishna, under the auspicious name of Vasudeva indulged in varied
playful deeds delighting the virtuous who were fortunate enough to discern
and listen to him.

2-54. So, this stripling, the incarnation of Lord Vayu, even in his concealed
form as Vasudeva, with his might unmanifest sported on earth to the
happiness of the virtuous like the rising sun even under the rows of clouds
blooming the curious eyes of the righteous.



3-1. Some years rolling by, one day, the couple (Madhyagehabhatta and his
wife) adored by the people as the parents of an admirable child, feasting
their eyes on his fascinating (moon-like) face, proceeded with pleasure from
their residence to please their relatives with participation in their festival.
स्व-जििापगमागम-सङ्गम-प्रनि-सभानजि-पवूक
य -सम्भ्रम।े
अनवदषी जििीनि स बालकाः शरणिो रणिो निरगान्नृनभाः॥3-2॥
3-2. In the midst of hectic activities of the assembled multitude moving in
and out meeting and greeting one another, the boy slipped from the house
divining that his mother would hardly be aware of his absence in that din and
haste.
क्व िुनररासनस िाि ि साम्प्रिंस्व-जि सन्त्यजिंिव साम्प्रिम।्
इनि नवभाः
ुपनर्क
ै
रुनदिो व्रजि न्स्मिमिाकुलमत्तु रमाििोि॥्3-3॥
3-3. Queried and advised by the passers-by ‘Oh lovable child, whither you
list to go? this straying from your people at this juncture unattended is not
salutary,’ the fearless boy moved ahead replying them with his disarming
smile.
त्वनरिमत्ये स कािि-दवेिा-सदिमत्र ििाम रमापनिम।्
अनप ििाः प्रगिो लघुिानळके-रप
य
ुपदान्तर-सद्म-गिंच िम॥्3-4॥
3-4. Soon, having arrived at the temple in Kudavoor in the forest he paid his
obeisance to Lord Narayana (consort of Goddess Mahalakshmi) and from
there went speedily to salute Lord Hari in the temple situated in Tale-Kude.
िनळििाभ-निभालि-समं दा-गम-नवकस्वर-भास्वर-लोचिाः।
जि-मिो-िरिाम्बजु -भास्करो रजि-पीठपरुंप्रररावसौ॥3-5॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 61

3-5. Vasudeva possessing sparkling eyes bloomed with the exhilarating
sight of the lotus-marvelled Narayana, delighted the curious eyes of his
onlookers like the glistening Sun blossoming the charming lotuses.
स-ुहर-मधे-गणानि-शरालवो हनर-िमस्कृिराः स-ुकृ िा इमााः।
इनि सरुर
ैनप भ-ूसरु-मडिलाः
ै
समिमि स् स-नवस्मरमीनक्षिाः॥3-6॥
3-6. The Gods and Brahmins who saw Vasudeva saluting Lord Narayana
with intense devotion being startled lauded him thus: ‘Every such systematic
Sashtanga (head-long prostration) excels in merit many Ashwamedha
yagnas’.
[This verse stresses the significance of Sashtanga Namaskara respectful
obeisance to the Almighty. In this connection Vidyamanyatirth Swamiji
highlighted its importance by quoting the example of the eminent
Bhismacharya who paid his reverential salutations to Parameshwara and
also to his devotees who earnestly pray: नमो ब्रह्मण्य देर्ाय गोब्राह्मण न्ििाय च जगन्द्धिाय
कृष्णाय गोन्नतदाय नमो नमः]
ि नह हनरंसििंि िमत्यसौ ि च ि पश्रनि िानप ि वन्दि।े
अनप िर्नेि नवधार नवशषेिाः स ििुसाध-ुजिाि स् मनशक्षरि॥्3-7॥
3-7. Vasudeva (Lord Vayu in embodiment) always bows before Lord
Narayana sees Him and extols Him with great devotion: (this is his wont).
Now he observed all these devotional formalities to set an example for the
virtuous to imitate.
अिवलोक्य सिुंसिु-वत्सलो मगृ रिेस्म मही-सरु-पङ्गुवाः।
महुुरपच्छृ दमष्यु गनिंिराि प्नर्-पनर् प्रगिोऽिपुदंर्द्ु
िम॥्3-8॥
3-8. Noting the absence of his darling son in the crown, the eminent Brahmin
Madhyagehabhatta forthwith rushed in search of him closely following his
foot-prints, eagerly enquiring with the wayfarers his whereabouts in every
path time and again.
जि-सदा-गनि-सनूचि-वत्मि
य
ा प्रनि-पदंव्रजिा पररा िषृ ा।
निज-महा-मध-ुपिे मिो-हरं नस्मिमलानभ सिुािि-वानर-जम॥्3-9॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 62

3-9. The anxious Madhyagehabhatta plodding the path pointed by the
people, moving up and down at every step with increasing hope saw at last
the smiling charming countenance of his missing son like the impatient bigbee carried away by the scent-bearing breeze to the lovely lotus.
नवरह-दूि-िरोद-्गमिोन्मिु ंन्यरुणदश्रुपरुा स ररोदृश
य ोाः।
अर् िरोाः प्र-मदोनत्थिमप्यदाः प्रनि-निरुद्ध्य नगरंगरुुरब्रवीि॥्3-10॥
3-10. The father who checked his gushing ears of parting pains with an
uplifted face (deeming it inauspicious) now (after recovery) like-wise withheld
shedding tears of joy and uttered these words:
अनर सिुदेमदुा-हर ित्विो ििुसमा-गिवािनस साम्प्रिम।्
स्व-जििा-रनहिस्य िुकोऽत्र िेसह-चरोऽभक
य
दीघ-य
िमेपनर्॥3-11॥
3-11. ‘Oh dear son; well, you have now arrived: Tell us truly who
accompanied you, a lad moving all alone on your distant journey (as your
associate).
जिक-वाचनममामव-धाररि क् ळमदुाहरदम्ब-ुरुहेक्षणाः।
स्व-पदमा-व्रजिो व्रजिोऽप्यिो ििुसिा मम कािि-गो नवभाः
ु॥3-12॥
3-12. Hearing heedfully the words of his father, Vasudeva with fascinating
eyes muttered in a faltering tone ‘Verily, the supreme Lord Narayana was my
companion on my way to his place in the forest and then during my travel to
Talekude temple’.
िनदिरारििात्तुरदाऽगमंकृि-रनिाः िलु ित्र हनराः सिा।
अहनमहानप महन्द्रे -नदगालरंप्रणिवाििु रावदधीश्वरम॥्3-13॥
3-13. During my tour from the Talekude temple to Chandramouleshwara
sanctuary where I saluted the immanent Lord Hari, the Talekude supreme
Lord escorted me.
अनप ििोऽहमपुत्ये सहामिुा भगवित्रे सिेप्रणनिंव्यधाम।्
इनि निगद्य नवभानि नशशाः
ुस्म नव-नस्मि-सभा-जि-चीण-य
सभाजिाः॥3-14॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 63

3-14. ‘From there Lord Chandramouleshwara gave me company to the
Ananteshwara temple where I paid my obeisance to Lord Narayana’, so
prattled the lustrous child Vasudeva, fondled by the amazed assembly.
नवरनहि-स्व-जिंचरण-नप्ररंनवनवध-भिू-भरङ्कर-वत्मनय
ि।
अनर कृपालर पालर बालकं लघ-ुशभुस्य ममत्ये िमद ्निजाः॥3-15॥
3-15. The Brahmin (Madhyagehabhatta) in all devotion bowed to Lord
Ananteshwara and earnestly prayed ‘oh merciful Lord: unlucky as I am,
protect my son fond of straying free from familiars, in fearful foot-ways full of
fierce fiends and animals’.
िमपु-गह्यृ सिुंस-ुिपो-निनधाः गहृ मसौ गनृहणी-सनहिो ररौ।
उदरिीनि नह बाल-नदवाकरेनस्मिमभिू स् -ुजिािि-वानर-जम॥्3-16॥
3-16. This eminent pious Brahmin hied to his house with his wife following
his son: thus the child grew up gladdening the righteous like the Sun
delighting the lotuses.
वर-नवमाि-नगरावनप चनडिका नशशमुहो जििी िमलाळरि।्
अपरर्ा पनरिष्टु-मिााः कर्ंनचरनमहष
ै
वसदे ्नव-सहारकाः॥3-17॥
3-17. Likewise Goddess Durga in the majestic Vimana-hill guarded him so
long: otherwise how could this stripling strolling in isolation be safe and be
so happy, so long?
सकल-शब्ध-मरी च सरस्विी सििमा-िमनि स्वरमवे रम।्
निज-वरोऽर् कदा-चि मािकृ ााः नकल सिुंपनर-चाररनि स्म िम॥्3-18॥
3-18. Then this learned Brahmin, on one auspicious day commenced to
teach the alphabets to his son, the embodied Lord Mukhyaprana who is
always saluted by Saraswati, the Presiding deity of speech.
नलनप-कुलं ििुिाि गिेनदिेनलनििमवे पिुनल
यनििंकुिाः।
इनि निज-प्रनिभा-गणु-भानविंहनर-पदस्य वचस्तमिन्दरि॥्3-19॥
3-19. During his lesson on the following day when the father as usual
repeated the same letters, the omniscient lad asked ‘papa, (why not proceed
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 64

ahead) why repeat the same letters tutored the other day?’ to the surprise of
his father who admired his innate intelligence.
नशशरुसौ प्रनिभाम्बनुधनरत्यलंजि-मिो-वचि-ग्रह-पीििा।
ि भविानदनि िंनवजि-स्थलेस्व-ििरंसमनशक्षरदषेकाः॥3-20॥
3-20. Madhyagehabhatta then began to school the boy in secrecy so
thinking, ‘this boy is a genius: Let not the evil forces and jealous minds affect
him’.
महविा स्व-जििे समीनरि-स्व-जििी सनहििे कदाचि।
रुनचर-वाचिराऽनचि
य -वानरिरा प्रनि-ररेप्रभणुा घिृ -वल्ल्यनप॥3-21॥
3-21. The talented Vasudeva commanding a wealth of words, appreciated
by the people for his dexterous and charming reading went with his mother
to the village Nayampalli being invited to attend a festival.
पनर-षदा नििरांपनर-वानरिाः नशव-पदाः नकल धौि-पटोद्भवाः।
इह कर्ांकर्रि द्दृशेििाः पर्ृ -ुनधरा पर्ृ कु ाकृनििाऽमिुा॥3-22॥
3-22. The wise Vasudeva (Mukhyaprana) in his boy-form noticed a narrator
of sacred stories by name Shiva belonging to the Mudinaya family in a
congregation encircled by many listeners.
इदमवुाच नवचार-नवचक्षणाः शनुच वचाः शिक
ै
ाः स जिान्तर।े
अपरर्ाकनर्िंकर्क त्वरा ििुमिान्महिानमनि स-नस्मिम॥्3-23॥
3-23. This wary (Vasudeva) slowly but distinctly said these words with a
smile in the midst of the assembled folk ‘oh Mythologist, your narration goes
against the version approved by the great masters (like Sage Shuka).
अगणरन्न नशवंजििा िदा स-वचिेवसदुवे-सिुाह्वर।े
मिु रनमच्छनि को मृग-धिूक
य ं प्रकृि-हुङ्कृि-नसहं -नशशौ सनि॥3-24॥
3-24. When the people gathered there listened to the words of Vasudeva,
named after Lord Krishna son of Vasudeva, they did not heed Shiva, the
sacred story-teller. Who will listen to the howls of a jackal when the lion-cut
begins to roar?
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 65

अर् कर्ंकर्रनेि िदा जिेगनदिवत्यनुचिार्म
य
दुाहरि।्
स समलाळ्रि नवस्मनरनभिर
य
ाः
ै
अनप सरुनै
वज
य
राङ्कुर-पजूक
ै
ाः॥3-25॥
3-25. ‘If not so’, said the people collected there, ‘You tell us the story’.
Vasudeva so entreated (by the listeners) narrated the correct import in the
said context and the assembly taken aback, immensely appreciated him and
the Gods too hailed this victory as a prelude to his future conquests.
स जििी-सनहिो जिकं गहृेप्रगिवास्तं मदुन्तमवदेरि।्
निगद िाि नशवाः कर्काः स नकं नविर्-गीरर्वाऽहनमिीररि॥्3-26॥
3-26. Vasudeva after returning to his residence with his mother related the
entire incident and asked his father ‘Tell me, Dad, Is Siva’s narration faulty
or mine?’
ििुसिुानविर्ंकनर्िंत्वर-ेत्यममुदुीर
य
स-नवस्मरमस्मरि।्
प्रकृनििाः कृनििा िलु मेनशशोाः मदनध-िार्-दरोदर-जत्ये सौ॥3-27॥
3-27. ‘Verily dear lad, your version is accurate’, said the startled father,
admiring the inborn talent of his son manifesting with the profuse grace of
Lord Anantasana whom he ever remembered.
कर्रिांप्रर्मेकर्रत्यलंस्व-जिकेजि-सङ्-विृ ेकर्ाम।्
सकल-लोक-मिो-िरिोत्सवाः चिरुधीाः स कदानचदवाचरि॥्3-28॥
3-28. One day, his own father renowned in narration was relating a sacred
story to a congregation gathered round him while the ingenious Vasudeva,
the delight of the minds and eyes of the people (with his lovely look) was
reading the text.
नवनवध-शानि-पदार्-यनिवदेिेनलकुच-िाम्नी िदाऽिनुदिार्क
य े।
नकनमनि िाि िदर्म
य
वणर
य
ि क् र्रसीनि शिर
ै
रमब्रवीि॥्3-29॥
3-29. In a certain context, when his father was elucidating the names of the
various trees, noticing him slurring over the meaning of term Likucha, he
gently asked, ‘Dear father why proceed ahead without giving the meaning of
this term’?
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 66

अवदिीनि नपिरनय
प चोनदिेप्रनि-बभुत्सु षुुित्र जिष्वे नप।
अरमदुीर
य
िदर्म
य
वाप्तवाि प्नरषदो ह्यसमाि-समाििाम॥्3-30॥
3-30. When the narrator-father though entreated did not come out with the
meaning and the assembly was equally curious to know it, Vasudeva as
desired, declared it to connote ‘a lime tree’ and received rich tributes.
बहु-नवधैश्चनरिैनरनि चारुनभाः सकल-लोक-कुिहूल-कानरणम।्
निज-वरणे वरस्यनुचिेनस्थिंिमपुििेमुििे दधेमिाः॥3-31॥
3-31. While Vasudeva enhanced the curiosity of the people by his
miraculous sportive activities, the eminent Brahmin (Madhyagehabhatta)
decided to perform his Upanayana ceremony, seeing that his son had
attained the proper age.
समनुचि-ग्रह-रोग-गणुानन्विंसमवाधार
य
महूुिम
य
दूषणम।्
प्रणर-बधरु-बाधववािसौ निज-कुलाकुलमत्सु वमाििोि॥्3-32॥
3-32. Madhyagehabhatta celebrated with pomp and fervour the thread
ceremony of Vasudeva in the midst of a concourse of Brahmins, dear
relatives and well-wishers on the appointed lucky day (free from all
blemishes) favoured by auspicious planets.
नवनवध-वदे-िरा नवनजहीषव
य ो वदि-रङ्ग-पदऽेस्य नचरार रााः।
सरु-वर-प्रमदा अनप स-नप्ररा अनभििन्दरहो नवरिो महम॥्3-33॥
3-33. The several presiding deities of the Vedas long awaiting this
auspicious moment to sport on the stage of his tongue (to come out of his
month) heartily felicitated Vasudeva on this festive occasion from the sky,
along with their life-partners.
नवनहि-साधि-सानधि-सि-्नक्ररो ज्वलिमज्वु ल-धीज्वल
य
रन्नरम।्
उप-नििार सिुंसकुुमारकं कुशनलिंकुशलीकृि-शीषक
य
म॥्3-34॥
3-34. The brilliant Madhyagehabhatta conducted the thread ceremony of the
clever Vasudeva, duly adorned with his shaved head in the prescribed Vedic
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 67

procedure complete in all respects, (with necessary things) with the
sacrificial fire blazing with the oblations.
पनरचरानग्न-गरु चनरि-व्रिाः स-ुचरणाः पठ साधुसदागमाि।्
इनि गरुोनि-जगद-्गरुु-नशक्षणेस्फुटमहानस सरु
ाः
ै
कृि-सानक्षनभाः॥3-35॥
3-35. The Gods, like the Sun and the Moon, witnessing the father initiating
and instructing Vasudeva the preceptor of the three worlds thus: (with these
words) ‘dear lad, serve with devotion the Lord of Fire and your teacher;
observe the vow of celibacy; let thy conduct be exemplary: Study in earnest
the spotless Vedas’, laughed aloud.
नजि-कुमार-गणु ंस-ुकुमारकं निज-कुमारमवक्ष्ये निरन्तरम।्
समनुचिाचरणेचिरुंस्विाः नक्षनि-सरुो मदुमारि नशक्षरि॥्3-36॥
3-36. Madhyagehabhatta (his instructor) felt intensely elated to see his own
soft son surpassing in virtues even Shanmukha, ever observing by himself
the prescribed code of conduct like Sandhya-Vandana with great devotion.
स-पट-िडिमनकञ्चि-वि क्व् नचि स्व् -नवभवािनुचिंचरणानदकम।्
भवुि-भिर
य
ुहो स्व-निगहूिंसरु-सभासुकुिहूलमाििोि॥्3-37॥
3-37. Vasudeva strolling with a strip of cloth (Koupin) like a poor mendicant
hiding his glory as the Lord of the three Worlds (being Lord Vayu) afforded a
curious sight for the Gods in the divine assemblies to see and exult.
अनवरळ
ै
गर
य
ळोष्मनभराकुली-कृ ि-समस्त-जिो नव-चचार राः।
क्वनचदमंुनि-नजघासं रुशानन्त-माि उ् प-ससप
य
स सप-यमरोऽसरु
ाः॥3-38॥
3-38. A dread evil in serpent-form moving at will, frightening the passers-by
with his poisonous fumes incurable by medicines or incantation approached
Vasudeva with an intention to kill him.
त्वनरिमद्युि-नवस्तिृ -मस्तकाः प्रनि-ददशं रदि
ै
मनवक्षिम।्
प्रभ-ुपदारुण-चारु-िराङ्गल
ु
ी-नवहृनि-नपष्ट-ििाः
ुप्र-ििाम साः॥3-39॥
3-39. Forthwith, (the demon in serpent-shape) with his uplifted head fully
spread-out stunt the impregnable Vasudeva. He (Vasudeva) lightly pressed
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 68

with the fingers of his reddish charming foot and the serpent with its body
crushed helplessly struggled.
गरुि-िड
ुिनमव प्रनि-पन्नवाि न्िज-कुमार-पदंस ममार च।
समनुचिंचनरिंमहिानमदंसमुिसो मिसष्टेमपजू रि॥्3-40॥
3-40. An attempt by the serpent to cut into the foot of the Brahmin-boy
Vasudeva was as good as being gripped by Garuda and was battered to
death. This was a (befitting) deed: the (eminent) ones also liked it and the
Gods extolled the same.
नगनरश-गवुम
य
रन्द्रे -मिु श्च
ै
र-च्चरण-रणे रुधानर सरुेश्वराः
ै।
नक्षनि-सरुाङ्घ्र्यनभ-वन्दि-पवूक
य ं स नव-दधऽेध्यरिंछल-मािषु
ाः॥3-41॥
3-41. Mukhyaprana, embodied in human form as Vasudeva, the dust of
whose feed is borne with devotion by the eminent gods like Mahadeva,
Brihaspati, Devendra and others, saluted the feet of the Brahmins and
commenced his study of the Vedas and scriptures.
कर-िळेिलु कन्दक-वि स् दा सकलरा कलरा सह नवद्यरा।
अनर-धरणे समंस्फुनरिंगरुोाः मिनस िस्य नविम्बरिो जिाि॥्3-42॥
3-42. Mukhyaprana, descended in human form as Vasudeva behaving like
the common man, indulged in the study of scriptures even though the everpresent knowledge of the Vedas and the varied arts along with the supreme
Lord Narayana the chief import of all learning in its prime sense glowed
crystal-clear in his enriched mind like a ball in the palm.
अिनधकैरनधकैश्च वरस्यर्ो बहुनभरध्यरिोप-रमान्तर।े
अनिकटेवट
ु
नभाः पट
ु
नभगर
य
ुोाः स नव-जहार सिु ी सनिनभाः समम॥्3-43॥
3-43. The cheerful Vasudeva indulged in sports during the recess after the
classes with his clever celibate chums younger and elder, a little away from
the teacher.
पदमदुीर
य
जविे नररानसिंर्द्ु
ि-सनिष्वभवि स् परुस्सराः।
अरमरत्-िरनेि ि नवस्मरो ििुमिो-जव-नजि प्विोऽसकौ॥3-44॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 69

3-44. He was the fore-runner with extreme ease in the running race
arranged among his friends to reach a fixed place. Verily, it is no wonder for
Vasudeva, Lord Vayu as he was himself in human form who had worsted the
speed of the mind.
प्लवि-िजे नस हन्त ि केवलं नवनजिवाि स् िदा सकलाि ज् िाि।्
प्रभ-ुनिदशे -करो हिमुि-्ििौ ििुजीगार स वानल-सिुानदकाि॥्3-45॥
3-45. How happy it was that even in high-jump he excelled all his comrades
in pluck. Did he not in his incarnation as Hanuman surpass Angada, son of
Wali and others in crossing the ocean when in search of Sita at the
command of Lord Ramachandra?
जल-नवहार-पराजनरनभाः स्पृधा सनिनभरीनरि-वानर-पनर-नश्रिम।्
वदिमाकुल-लोचिमा-दधेनस्मिममष्यु नह कञ्चि नवभ्रमम॥्3-46॥
3-46. In the swimming competition, even with his reddened and distracted
eyes with the water splashed in righteous anger by his foiled friends, this
lad’s lovely face with its pleasing smile gathered a new glint.
स शिक
ै
बनय
लिोऽरगुपद-्गिाि प्र्-नवहृिषे ुसिीि न्िरपािरि।्
अशिक
ै
रग
य
ुपि प्र्कृिाहवाि स् -हनसिो निज-सिूरुरत्वाि॥्3-47॥
3-47. Even in the wrestling match, the valiant Vasudeva felled with a smile,
with great east his strong friends who dared to face him both severally and
collectively.
ग्रहण-निग्रहणेग्रहणेदृढेगरुु-भरोद्धरणानद-नवधौ पटौ।
इह नवभावपुचार-नधरा िणृ ांऋिमरंििुभीम इिीनरिम॥्3-48॥
The people who witnessed Vasudeva, the champion in close-gripping game,
not allowing his dear mates to escape, and easily gliding from their firm
grasp when seized, lifting heavy weights with the least exertion, exclaimed in
wonder: Indeed he is Bhimasena and surprisingly enough even this
secondary denotation turned true in his case.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 70

नव-हरिीनि पठत्यनप ि स्फुटं स्व-गहृ-गानमनि चार्द्ु
िमारनि।
पनर-ििुोष ि ित्र जगद-्गरुौ स नकल पगू-विान्वर-जो निजाः॥3-49॥
3-49. The teacher of Vasudeva belonging to the Totantillaya family
expressed his dissatisfaction with his poor progress thus: ‘(Vasudeva)
heavily indulges in sports and takes his studies lightly. He is brisk in frequent
visits to his house and returns at leisure’.
अर् कदा-चि सोऽद्यरिान्तरेिमवदि क् ुनपिोऽन्य-मिनस्विम।्
पठनस िो शठ िेसिनभाः समंनकनमनि नित्यमदुानसि-धीनरनि॥3-50॥
3-50. The teacher, once during the time of instruction finding Vasudeva
inattentive in indignation banged him: ‘You naughty boy, why would not you
mind your studies like other students? Why always this indifference to your
lessons?
गणुनिका चरणानदक-गोचरा ि मम हृद-्दनरित्ये नुदिऽेमिुा।
वद नवशारद-वाद रर्नेििंत्वमपुरीत्यवदद ्धरणी-सरु
ाः॥3-51॥
3-51. When Vasudeva replied, ‘To learn by rote the Vedic pada part by part,
is not dear to my heart’: the enraged Brahmin said ‘then, you talking like a
great talent, recite any later hymn of your own liking’.
सकल-लक्षण-नशक्षण-मलू -भाः
ू श्रनुि-समामििंस्खलिोनििम।्
ि िलु केवलमस्य गरुोव्यध
य
ाि स् मुिसामनप ित्र कुिहूलम॥्3-52॥
3-52. The faultless recital of the hymn, with its immaculate pronunciation of
the Vedic Words, providing a model for learning Vedic intonation won
admiration not only of the teacher but of the Gods in heaven.
नप्ररवरस्य-नशरो-गरुु-वदेिांअशमरि स् हजामनप दस्सहाम।्
स नवनपिेनव-जिेमिु -वारिुा श्रवण-गोचनरििे कदा-चि॥3-53॥
3-53. Once, in a lonely forest, with his mouth-blown wind into the ear of his
dear friend, the beloved son of his preceptor, Vasudeva quietened his inborn
and intolerable acute headache.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 71

अनध-गिोपनिषच्छ सकृच्छ्रि
ु
ा प्रकट-भागविीनि ि नवस्मराः।
अनध-गिा ििुजात्वनप ि-श्रिुााः प्रनिभरा श्रिुराः शिशोऽमिुा॥3-54॥
3-54. It is no wonder that Vasudeva could learn the whole Maha
Narayanopanishad having listened to it only once: he could as well learn
hundreds of Vedic hymns and texts with his innate genius not having heard
even once.
साक्षादर्ोप-निषदो नवभरुि
ै
रय्ये ााः पाठ-च्छलेि नव-जिर्े-य
रसंब्रवुाणाः।
अध्यापकार नव-ििार नव-मोक्ष-बीजं गोनवन्द-भनक्तमनुचिांगरुु-दनक्षणां साः॥3-55॥
3-55. The capable Vasudeva, under the pretext of taking lessons in
Mahaitereyopanishad in a secluded place directly communicated to his
preceptor the real nature of Lord Vishnu and engendered in him intense
devotion, the real seed of salvation - this enlightenment being his
preceptorial fee.
अनर स्वानमि द्ष्टाि द्मर-दमर स्पष्टमनचराद ्
गणुाि गढूाि न्वष्णोाः कर्र-कर्र स्वाि प्र्-मदरि।्
िदाऽऽिन्दंिन्वनन्ननि सुमिसांसोऽि-ुसरिराम ्
अिज्ुामादत्त नत्रभवुि-गरुुब्राह्म
य
ण-गरुोाः॥56॥
3-56. Vasudeva, the Guru of the three worlds who secured the permission of
his teacher (to launch his future programme of action) delighted the Gods
who solicited him thus: ‘oh Lord, punish the wicked. Refute the hostile
doctrines. Expound early, clearly the cloaked attributes of Lord Vishnu and
delight your devotees’.
इनि श्रीमत्कनव-कुल-निलक-नत्रनवक्रम-पनडििाचार-यसिु श्री िारारण-पनडििाचार-यनवरनचिे
श्री-मध्व-नवजरे महा-काव्य ेआिन्दानङ्कि ेििृ ीर सगाः
य
 चिर्ु
ाः
य सगाः
य - [4-54]
अर्ैष सल्लोक-दरा-सधुार्द्
य
रा सदागम-स्तिे-निरास-कामरा।
रमा-वरावास-भवुा नवशारदो नवशालराऽनचन्तरदात्मिो नधरा॥4-1॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 72

4-1. After the period of study the wise Vasudeva, moved with intense mercy
for the virtuous and keen to controvert the felons who had robbed the sacred
Vedas and scriptures of their real import (and restore their real status)
contemplated in his immaculate and spacious mind, the abode of Lord
Narayana, the consort of Goddess Mahalakshmi, thus:
अिन्य-सङ्गाद ्गणु-सनङ्गिा हराःे जिस्यमािंिुनवनशष्ट-चनेष्टिम।्
असङ्गमस्माि प्र्कटी-करोम्यहं निजंभजि प्ारम-हंस्यमाश्रमम॥्4-2॥
4-2. Since total detachment with worldly objects alone can usher in adoration
for the supreme (with his admired attributes) and the commoner copies
(takes it as the norm) the conduct of the great, so will I accept the highest
order of the ascetic and manifest my innate indifference to earthly
attainments.
(The crowd believes in the saints: it is the sacred duty of sages to save the
souls of the eligible by giving them supreme knowledge.)
मम प्रभोिाप
य
रर्ा नह शोभिेनिषत्सुनवष्णंुरददडि-धारणम।्
हनर-स्वसा िन्वनचरादसद-्नभदेभवदेिो िानस्म च दडि-धारकाः॥4-3॥
4-3. Puissant as I am, it behoves me not if I do not punish the despisers of
Lord Vishnu but I cannot take arms since Goddess Durga the direct sister of
Lord Krishna is soon to incarnate to demolish the depraved; hence to accept
asceticism is the only way out (to redeem the noble).
नव-नचन्तरनन्नत्थमिन्त-नचन्तकाः समस्त-सन्यं ास-निबद्ध-निश्चराः।
असावि-ुज्ार्म
य
र्ािमद्धनरंसमस्त-स-ंव्यानपिमात्म-दार-गम॥्4-4॥
4-4. Vasudeva ever contemplating on Lord Narayana in his Ananta form and
thinking thus resolved to renunciate all worldly things like one’s own
residence and bowed to Lord Hari, immanent in all these things he was
attached to again and again to seek his permission (to detach himself from
the objects he loved, to accept asceticism).
निजेजिेनकं िमसीनि पच्छृ नि ब्रवुि स्व् -वस्त-ुप्रणनिंव्यधानमनि।
गरुोाः नकलान्वषेणवाि ज् गद-्गरुु
ाः िदा जगामानिल-लोक-नशक्षकाः॥4-5॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 73

4.5. Being questioned by his father and his other near relatives as to why
and to whom he was saluting often, Vasudeva answered that he was bowing
to the all-pervading Lord Narayana present in all the things he was
connected with till then and even though the preceptor of the world, he
moved in search of teacher to set a norm for the common man.
रनिरि
य
ात्मा भनुव कश्चिाभवद ्नवभषूणो भनूर-नवरनक्त-भषूणाः।
ि िाम-मात्राच्छुनचमर्ि
य ोऽनप रंजिोऽच्यिु-प्रक्षे मदुाहरि स्फ् ुटम॥्4-6॥
4-6. There dwelt an ascetic on earth then who had subdued his senses,
embellished with detachment even though undecked by earthly ornaments,
befittingly named (not only in its literal sense) Achuthapreksha, the knower
of Brahman.
परुष
ै
कृष्णा-कर-नसद्ध-शनुद्धमद-्वरान्न-भक्त्यु ा नकल पाडिवालर।े
नव-शोनधिात्मा मध-ुकृि-्प्रवनृत्तमाि च् चार कानंश्चि प्नर-वत्सराि म् दुा॥4-7॥
4.7. This ascetic Achuthapreksha in his previous birth living on alms was
fortunate enough to receive holy rich food at the hands of divine Droupadi
that had sanctified his body and mind and had moved about in the land of
the Pandavas for a few years.
अभिू क् ु-शािाभ्सिंि पािकं क्रमागिाद ्नव-प्रनिसारिो रिाःे।
रर्ा कु-शिाध्यसिंमरु-निषाः पदाम्बजु ेव्याध-वरस्य गनहि
ि
म॥्4-8॥
4-8. Being highly penitent, Achuthapreksha did not incur sin for having
studied the evil Shastra like the contrite courageous hunter Jara absolved of
his crime of aiming the arrow at the lovely feet of Lord Krishna.
नविीिमाम्नार-नशरो-नवशारदंसदव
ै
ित्वंप्र-बभुत्सु मादराि।्
गरुुनवनय
दत्वोप-ििांनिजांमनृिंकदा-नचदूचेिमपु-ह्वरेनगरम॥्4-9॥
4-9. Once the preceptor of Achuthapreksha realizing the approach of his
final release advised in secrecy his disciple (Achuthapreksha) unassuming in
nature, well-versed in the Vedas and Upanishads and ever curious to know
the true nature of Brahman, thus:
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 74

अहंस्वरंब्रह्म ि नकनञ्चदनस्त मि-्परं नवजाृ िे रदा स्फुटं नचनिाः।
इिीह मारा-समरोप-पानदिंनिरन्वराि स् -ुव्रि मा स्म नवश्वसीाः॥4-10॥
4-10. ‘Oh Achuthapreksha, the close observer of rigorous vows, never
believed in the baseless and irrational doctrine propagated by the
Mayavadins: ‘I am Parabrahma: there is nothing else other than me: I can
realise this (perfect identity) after the dawn of real knowledge.’
रदिे दात्मक्य
ै
मपुानस्त-चोनदिंि मेगरुोरप्यपरोक्ष-िांगिम।्
परुा-ििािामनप सौम्य कुत्र नचि ि्िो मकुुन्दंभज सनंवदेमदुा॥4-11॥
4-11. Since the identity of Jiva and Paramatma decreed by the Mayavadins
for contemplation of their followers was experienced neither by my preceptor
nor his predecessors, abjure this abject doctrine, ‘Oh! Gentle natured
Achuthapreksha serve with great delight Lord Mukunda, the bestower of
bliss for the attainment of supreme knowledge’.
इिीदमानदश्र वचो वचनस्वनि स्वकेगरुौ लोकमर्ान्यमीरनुष।
असवेिाऽऽलोच्य महुुगर
य
ुोनगर
यंस रप्य-पीठालरनमनन्दरा-वरम॥्4-12॥
4-12. Directed thus with words of wisdom when the eloquent teacher
journeyed to the other world, Achuthapreksha his devout disciple recollecting
often the preceptorial mandate served devotedly Lord Anantasana, consort
of Goddess Mahalakshmi in the temple at Udupi.
स-ुभनक्तिा ििे स भक्त-वत्सलो नि-षनेविस्तत्र परंबभुत्सु िुा।
भनवष्यिाः नशष्य-वरानद्ध नवनद्ध माम इ्नि प्रनवष्टाः परुुषंिमभ्धाि॥्4-13॥
4-13. Lord Anantasana being served with ardent devotion by
Achuthapreksha craving to understand the Supreme Truth entered a person
and foretold ‘you will know me through a would-be eminent disciple (the
incarnation of Lord Vayu) of yours’.
प्रिीक्षमाणंिमि-ुग्रहंमदुा नि-षवेमाणंपिुरम्बजुक्षे णम।्
सिां गरुु
ाः कारण-मािषुाकृनिाः रनिंप्रशान्तंिमपुा-ससाद साः॥4-14॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 75

4-14. Vasudeva, the preceptor of the upright who descended on earth in
human form for the dissemination of the Dwaita doctrine approached the
placid Achuthapreksha who was anxiously awaiting the arrival of the disciple
bringing the divine grace and serving with diligence Lord Anantasana with
his charming eyes.
सिुंरिीन्द्राि-ुचरं नव-रानगणंनिशम्य सन्यं ास-निषडण-मािसम।्
स-ुवत्सलौ रप्य-िळालरा-नस्थिंनवरोग-िान्तौ नपिरौ समीरिाः
ु॥4-15॥
4-15. Having heard that their son Vasudeva had become the disciple of the
eminent Saint Achuthapreksha and was (given to renunciation) bent upon
accepting asceticism, the affectionate parents aggrieved by his intolerable
parting approached him at Udupi.
वराश्रमस्तेजरिोरिार्रोाः ि जीविोाः स्यादनर िन्दिाऽवरोाः।
स राचिंवाक्यमदुीरि
य
ानवदंपरीत्य पत्रुार िनिंनव-ििेिाः
ु॥4-16॥
4-16. ‘Dear child, it does not behove you to accept that order of the monk
when we two decrepit, with none to care, still survive,’ thus earnestly
entreating, they went round him and bowed.
िनिि
य
शश्रुषू-ुजिार शस्यिेििंभवद्भ्ांस्फुटमत्र साम्प्रिम।्
अहो नवधात्रा स्वरमवे दानपिा िदभ्िज्ुनेि जगाद स प्रभाः
ु॥4-17॥
4-17. ‘Even though bowing by the elders to the youngsters is not
commendable, both of you have bent down before me: it is surprising that
the supreme Lord by his voluntary gesture of yours has propelled you both
(my parents) to permit me to accept the order of the monk,’so said the able
Vasudeva.
(The salutation of the father to his son is a silent assent to permit him to
become an ascetic)
अित्तु र-ज्ाः स िमर्र
य
ि प्िु
ाः रिीन्द्रमा-िम्य गिाः नप्ररा-रिु
ाः।
गहृेवसि क् ल्प-समाि क्ष् णाि ि्रि स् िुाििन्दे ोरनिशंििोऽस्मरि॥्4-18॥
4-18. Madhyagehabhatta being disarmed solicited his son again not to do so
and bowing to the eminent Saint Achuthapreksha returned with his wife and
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 76

abided in his house with time hanging heavy, every moment appearing like
the passage of a Kalpa, (a long duration) always remembering the radiant
(moon-like) and lovely face of his son.
स नचन्तरि प्त्रुमिो-रर्ंशचुा पिुश्च िीत्वोप-गिो महा-िदीम।्
रिीश्वराि-ुव्रिमात्म-िन्दिंिमक्ष
ै
ि ग्राम-वरेमठान्तर॥े 4-19॥
4-19. Madhyagehabhatta sad enough, musing over his son’s aspirations
crossed the Netravati river and saw his son staying at the Katyadi monastery
in the Karyuru village serving his preceptor observing the regulated religious
practice.
स जाि-कोपाकुनलिो धरा-सरुो महात्मिांलङ्ि-भीरुरप्यलम।्
सिुस्य कौपीि-धिृ ौ नह साहस-प्रनि-श्रवो मेदृढ इत्यभाषि॥4-20॥
4-20. Though the Brahmin (Madhyagehabhatta) by nature timorous of
transgressing the high-souled ones, out of righteous indignation born of
deep affliction told his son of his firm resolve to fast unto death in case he
wore the Koupina the mark of Sanyasa (renunciation).
क्षणिे कौपीि-धरो निजंपटं नवदार
य
हेिाि कुरुष्व साहसम।्
इिीममक्त्वु ा प्रभरुब्रवीि प्िु
ाः शभुान्तरारंि भवाश्चं रनेदनि॥4-21॥
4-21. Forthwith he tore a piece of cloth from his raiment and wearing it (as
Koupina) asked his father to launch his venture if he could, still earnestly
imploring him (not to incur sin) by impeding an auspicious act.
(He cannot give up his life since he is not ready to let go Mukhyaprana,
Vasudeva his son.)
ि पत्रु नपत्रोरविंनविा शभुंवदनन्त सन्तो ििुिौ सिुौ मिृ ौ।
नि-विम
य
ािेि नह पालकोऽनस्त िौ त्वरीनि वक्तारनममंसिुोऽब्रवीि॥्4-22॥
4-22. His father cogently pleaded ‘Oh dear son, there is nothing more
propitious than the protection of the parents, so the scriptures state; since
our two sons have passed away and if you too depart (being a monk) who
will take care of us?’ Vasudeva replied:
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 77

रदा नवरक्ताः परुुषाः प्र-जारिेिदव
ै
सन्यं ास-नवनधाः श्रिुौ श्रिु
ाः।
ि सङ्ग-हीिोऽनप पनर-व्रजानम वाम अ् हं िुशश्रु षूमुकल्परनन्ननि॥4-23॥
4-23. ‘Oh dear father, my acceptance of asceticism does not contravene the
mandate of the sacred scriptures as the Vedas vouch ‘The moment one
renounces all worldly attachments he should enter the rank of the monk’.
Even then I will not enter saint-hood, till I provide some one (a brother) to
protect you both.
बहु-श्रिुत्वाद ्रनद िि स् हेबलाि ि् सा सनवत्री नवरहंसहेि ि।े
इनि निजिेानभ-नहिऽेिमि स् िंभवाििज्ुांप्र-ददानत्वनि ब्रवुि॥्4-24॥
4-24. The reconciled father pleaded: ‘Well-versed in scriptures as I am,
some-how I may muster might to put up with thy parting but she who has
given you birth will never brook this unbearable breach.’ Vasudeva replied
bending low before his beloved parent, ‘Pray, at least you allow me to accept
asceticism’. (I will see how to manage my mother.)
नवनचन्त्य नविाि स् निरुत्तरी-कृ िाः िर्ाऽस्तुमािाऽिुवददे ्रदीनि िम।्
उदीर
य
कृच्छ्रादप-गम्य मनन्दरं नप्ररा-सकाशेिमदुन्तमब्रवीि॥्4-25॥
4-25. The discreet father thus disarmed, with full thought said with great
difficulty ‘well let it be so in case your mother consents’ and coming back
narrated the news to his wife. (He thought he may succeed to persuade his
wife to withhold her assent and save this situation.)
निशा-चरारनेरव लक्ष्मणाः परुा वकृ ोदरस्यवे सरुन्द्रे -िन्दिाः।
गदोऽर् शौरनेरव कम-य
कृि न्प्रराः सुभनक्तमाि न्वश्व-नवदोऽिजु ोऽभवि॥्4-26॥
4-26. A beloved brother was born to the omniscient Vasudeva who served
him with intense devotion and love. He was as dear to him (Vasudeva) as
was Lakshmana to Lord Ramachandra the adversary of the Asuras and
Arjuna the son of Indra to Bhimasena and Gada to Lord Sri Krishna.
कदानचदाप्याऽलर-बनुद्धरालरंनि-वदेरि प्ालकमिेमिेरोाः।
दृढ-स्व-सन्यं ास-निषधेनिश्चरांधवािमुत्यदेमवुाच मािरम॥्4-27॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 78

4-27. Vasudeva of indestructible knowledge even during the deluge,
(dissimilar to other divines) hied to his dwelling one day and pointing to the
dear new-born as the defender (of the parents) spoke to his mother who had
firmly decided on her husband’s suggestion to disallow him to be sworn as a
monk thus:
वराश्रमानप्तंमम स-ंवदस्व मांकदानचदप्यम्ब रदीच्छसीनक्षिमु।्
रदन्यर्ा दशे नममंपनर-त्यजि ि् जािुदृष्टनेवष
य
रो भवानम वाः॥4-28॥
4-28. ‘If you long to look on me anymore, pray permit me, mother, to enter
monkhood lest I may leave this land for good never to be discerned by you
two.’
इनि ब्रवुाणेििरेकदानचद-प्यदशि
य ंिस्य मिृ नेिद
य
शि
य
म।्
नवनचन्त्य परा-य
कुनलिा नचकीनषि
य ंसिुस्य कृच्छ्रान्न्यरुणन्न सा शभुा॥4-29॥
4-29. ‘Never to be seen again is as good as being no more’, so considered
the noble mother and contrary to her contemplation conceded to her son’s
request to accept the saintly order, in dire distress.
अर्ोपगम्यष
ै
गरुुं जगद्गरु
ु
ाः प्रसाद्य िंदवे-वर-प्रसानदिाः।
सदा समस्ताश्रम-भाक्सरुश्वे रो नवशषेिाः िल्वभजद ्वराश्रमम॥्4-30॥
4-30. Vasudeva, the preceptor of the world approaching his teacher for
instruction, the propeller and regulator of the Gods for whose grace they
always aspire craving for the favour of his Guru, the simultaneous observer
of all the four orders of life specially selecting sainthood, was ordained as a
monk by Achuthapreksha pleased with the devoted services of his dear
disciple (Vasudeva): How strange!
नक्ररा-कलापंसकलंस काल नवद ्नवधाि-मागण
ेनवधार केवलम।्
सदा प्रसन्नस्य हराःे प्रसत्तरेमहुु
ाः समस्त-न्यसिंसमभ्धाि॥्4-31॥
4-31. Vasudeva having undergone the several religious acts to be performed
at varied intervals in a methodical manner as enjoined in the scripture for the
greater grace of the supreme Lord (though always pleased with him)
dedicated all his belongings to Him, again.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 79

अिन्त-मात्रान्तमदुाहरन्ती रंनत्रमात्र-पवू
ं
प्रणवोच्चरंबधुााः।
िदाऽभवद ्भानव-चिमुि
य
ु ाकृनिाः जपानधकानर रनिरस्य सनूचिाः॥4-32॥
4-32. Vasudeva being inducted into the saintly order became the greatest
befitting beneficiary (being the future Chaturmukha Brahma) to repeat the
Pranava Mantra proclaimed by the wisest to be the highest, consisting of
myriad words of several types beginning with Aa, u and ma.
गणुाि-ुरपोन्ननि पणू -यबोध इ-त्यमष्यु िाम निज-वृन्द-वनन्दिाः।
उदाहरद ्भनूर-रशा नह केवलं ि मन्र-वणाः
य
स च मन्र-वणक
य
ाः॥4-33॥
4-33. Vasudeva is not only famous in the celebrated stutis as Dashapramati
and adored by the learned Brahmins matching his excellence in merits, but
his preceptor of great renown honoured by the band of the learned also gave
him the befitting appellation (after his induction into monkhood).
निरङ्ग-रागंमिु -राग-वनजि
य ंनव-भषूणंनवष्टप-भषूणानरिम।्
अमंुधिृ ाषाढमवक्ष्ये मनेिरेस्वभाव-शोभाऽिपुमनेप जन्तवाः॥4-34॥
4-34. The common people who observed Poornaprajna with his saintly-staff
in hand with his body though not decked with precious ornaments or
cosmetic material or painted lips, yet an embellishment of the world,
conceived that the innate peerless lustre is really excelling.
भजुङ्ग-भिूशे -नवहङ्गपानदकैाः प्र-वनन्दिाः सावसर-प्रिीक्षणैाः।
ििाम सोऽरंगरुु-पवूक
य
ाि र्िीि अ् हो महीरो महिांनविम्बिम॥्4-35॥
4-35. The eminent divine like Garuda, the protector of birds, Shesha the lord
of serpents, and Rudra the master of creatures await their opportunity to lay
prostrate before Poornaprajna (Lord Vayu). It is strange that he now paid his
obeisance to his preceptor Achuthapreksha and other monks. It is surprising
to see the Great ones imitating the ways of the ordinary persons (to educate
the mortals).
वराश्रमाचार-नवशषे-नशक्षणंनव-नधत्सरुस्याऽऽचनरिंनि-शामरि।्
नवशषे-नशक्षांस्वरमाप्य धीर-धीाः रिीश्वरो नवस्मरमारिाऽन्तरम॥्4-36॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 80

3-36. Achuthapreksha, the distinguished ascetic with a steadfast mind
desiring to train Poornaprajna in the methodology of monk-hood was not
only startled to note him observing meticulously all the religious procedures
of his own but in turn learnt a few things from him.
स रप्य-पीठालर-वानसिेरदा ििाम िार्ार महा-मनिमद
य
ुा।
िदाऽमिुाऽग्रानह िर प्रवनेशिा भजु ेभजुिेऽऽशुभजुङ्ग-शानरिा॥4-37॥
4-37. When Poornaprajna happily paid his homage to Lord Anantasana, the
presiding deity of Udupi lying on the serpent bed; He entered a person and
raised him up with his arms in great affection.
नचराि स् -ुित्वं प्र-बभुत्सु िुा त्वरा निषवेणंमेरदकानर िि फ् लम।्
इमंददामीत्यनभ-धार सोऽमिुा िदा प्रणीर प्र-ददऽेच्यिुात्मि॥े 4-38॥
4-38. ‘For having served me with great devotion for a long duration with an
ardent desire to divine the true nature of Brahman, you now receive this
cherished gift’, so saying Lord Anantasana handed over Poornaprajna to
Achuthapreksha.
अिग्रुहं िंप्रनि-गह्यृ साग्रहंमदुाऽऽत्मिाऽऽप्तांकृि-कृत्यिांस्मरि।्
अभदूसङ्गोऽनप स िि-्स-ुसङ्गवाि अ् सङ्ग-भषूा ििुसाध-ुसनङ्गिा॥4-39॥
4-39. Accepting the benediction received in the form of the disciple in full
faith and intense delight, deeming himself highly blessed, repeatedly
recollecting Lord Hari, though himself a cloistered recluse remained close in
the company of Poornaprajna. Indeed association with the righteous is an
embellishment to those disassociated from earthly desires.
नररासनि स्वस्तनटिीं महुमहु
य
ु
ाः िमत्यिज्ुानर्नय
ि भनूर-चिेनस।
िमस्मरि स्व् ानमिमवे दूि-धीाः गरुुभनय
वष्यद-्नवरहानग्न-शङ्करा॥4-40॥
4-40. Discerning Poornaprajna bowing to him again and again to seek his
permission to depart for a plunge in the celestial river (Ganges), the
preceptor Achuthapreksha with a distressed mind apprehensive of his
parting from his pupil, remembered Lord Hari (for his rescue).
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 81

इिस्तिृ ीरेनदवसेद्य-ुनिम्नगा त्वदर्म
य
ास्माक-िटाकमाव्रजिे ।्
अिो ि रारा इनि िंिदाऽवदि प्र्नवश्र कनञ्चि क् रुणा-करो हनराः॥4-41॥
4-41. The merciful Lord Narayana entered a person and conveyed to
Poornaprajna thus: ‘on the very third day, the supernal Ganges will flow into
our lake, for your sake. You need not undertake your journey for the
intended ablution.
(This is how the supreme responds to the requests of his devotees.)
िदाज्रोपागि-जािवी-जलेजिोऽत्र सस्नौ सह पणू -य
बनुद्धिा।
ििाः परंिादश-वत्सरान्तरेसदाऽऽव्रजिे स् ा िदिग्रुहानङ्किी॥4-42॥
4-42. When the blessed Bhagirathi hied to the holy lake to obey the order of
the Lord, Poornaprajna along with those who accompanied him plunged into
the pious pond and then onwards, after an interval of twelve years, she flows
into Madhwa-Sarovara without fail in memory of the divine grace showered
on Madhwacharya.
गिेनदिािांदशकेसमासकेवराश्रमंप्राप्य स-पत्र-लम्बिम।्
नजगार जत्र
ै
ाि ब्हु-िक
य-कक
य
शाि स् वासदुवेह्वर-पनडििानदकाि॥्4-43॥
4-43. Forty days after initiation into the ascetic order, Poornaprajna
vanquished the victorious Vasudeva and order distinguished pundits,
specialized in hard logic, in disputation and obtained in writing a record of
victory.
गरुोाः स्व-नशष्यंचिरुं नचकीशि
य
ाः प्रचोदिाि श्र् ोिनुमहोप-चक्रम।े
अर्ष्टे-नसनद्धश्फल-जानि-वानरनधाः निरादरणे ानप महात्मिाऽमिुा॥4-44॥
4-44. Afterwards, at the will of his teacher who wished to make his student
still wiser, Poornaprajna began to listen reluctantly enough to his lectures on
(the volume) ‘Istasiddhi’, a treasure of deceitful disputations.
िदाद्य-पद्य-स्थमवद्य-मडिलं रदाऽवदि ष्ोिशक-िरात्मकम।्
उपरप
य
ास्तंिनदनि ब्रवुत्यसौ गरुौ िमचू ेप्रनण-गद्यिानमनि॥4-45॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 82

4-45. When thirty-two defects were pointed out by Poornaprajna in the very
opening verse and his preceptor tried to postpone their elucidation by
pleading that the answers were to be found in the subsequent stanzas, the
pupil entreated the teacher to tell them forthwith.
भवि-्प्र-वक्तृ त्व-समर्ि
य
ा ि मेस-कोपनमत्थंवदनि व्रिीश्वर।े
अपीह मारा-समरेपटौ िणृ ांबभवू िद-्दूषण-सशं राङ्कुराः॥4-46॥
4-46. When Achuthapreksha though highly distinguished in Maya Shastra,
out of resentment expressed his disability to teach him (Poornaprajna), a
doubt sprouted in the minds of the people assembled there as regards the
validity of Adwaita doctrine.
बधुोऽनभधािंश्रवणंबधुिे रो ध्रवुंनव-दध्याद ्नव-ममुक्षुरुात्मिाः।
रनिनवश
य
षेानदनि लोक-चोदिाि प्र्वनक्त मारा-समरस्मं पणू -यधीाः॥4-47॥
4-47. The seekers of salvation should either harangue or hear; those that
are learned should lecture and the layman should listen and the erudite
Madhwacharya propelled by the people discoursed on the Maya-Shastra.
अिनडििोपन्यसिंनव-सशं रंस-सप्रं दारंप्र-वचोदृढोत्तरम।्
समागमि श्र् ोिमुमष्यु साग्रहााःजिााःश्रिुाढ्ाश्चिरुा बभुषूवाः॥4-48॥
4-48. Learned pundits soaked in scriptures desiring to be sharper still
listened (with great devotion) to his distinguished uninterrupted disquisitions
based on traditional knowledge marked with crystal-clear analysis and firm
replies for all doubts.
गरुोरुपान्तेश्रवणेरिनै
िज
ि
ाः
ै
स पञ्चषभ
ै
ाग
य
विेकदाचि।
बहु-प्रकारेनलनििऽेनप वानचिेप्रकारमकें प्रभरुभ्धाद ्दृढम॥्4-49॥
4-49. Once Achuthapreksha was discoursing on Srimad Bhagawata with six
or seven students by his side listening with interest. When he came across a
variant reading in various written texts, Poornaprajna pointed out with
certainty the reading acceptable to Lord Vedavyasa.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 83

पर-प्रकारष्वे नप सावत्सुिेनवनिणर
य ोऽस्मि क् र्नमत्यधुीनरि।े
मकुुन्द-बोधिे महा-हृदब्रवीि प्र्कारमिे ंभगवि-्कृिंस्फुटम॥्4-50॥
4-50. Thereupon, when Achuthapreksha questioned him as to how he could
with such conviction fix upon a particular reading when other versions also
could fit in, Poornaprajna substantiated his selected reading with valid
reasons.
नि-गद्यिांगद्यनमहव
ै
पञ्चमेजगद-्गरुोवत्थ
े
कृनि-नस्थनिंरनद।
इनि ब्रवुाणेरनि-सत्तमेस्वरंिदक्त-मागण
े
जगाद भनूर-हृि॥्4-51॥
4-51. Achuthapreksha trying to test Poornaprajna thus expressed: ‘If you are
so thoroughly conversant with Lord Vedavyasa’s methodology then distinctly
narrate the prose-part of the V Canto of Srimad Bhagawata.’ Poornaprajna
accordingly recited correctly the specified portion composed by Lord
Vedavyasa.
अशषे-नशश्रैश्च िदाज्रा िदा परीक्षणारैनक्ष समस्त-पस्तु कम।्
स ित्र हन्तैक-िमेनस्थिंत्यजि ि् िावदध्यार-निकारमभ्धाि॥्4-52॥
4-52. When at the behest of the preceptor the rest of the pupils were
carefully examining their texts, it was strange to note Poornaprajna
unmistakably quoting chapter and verse sticking to one particular
(authorized) version of the celebrated work.
अत्र जन्मनि ि रि प्नठिम ि् ेचत्र
ै
भानि कर्नमत्यमिुोक्ते।
पवू-य
जन्मसुनह वदे परुदेंसवनय
मत्यनमि-बनुद्धरुवाच॥4-53॥
4-53. The flabbergasted teacher thereupon asked his celebrated disciple, ‘oh
triumphant one! How did this profound knowledge flash on your mind when
you have not studied these volumes in this life?’ Poornaprajna humbly
answered ‘Oh, Revered Sire, I have assimilated all this in my previous
births’.
इनि बहु-नवध-नवश्वाश्चर-यनचत्त-प्रवृत्ताःे जगनि नविनिमापन्निूिाऽप्यस्य कीनिाः
य।
क्षनपि-िि-िमस्का भास्करीव प्रभाऽलंसजुि कुमदु-वृन्दािन्द-दा चनन्द्रकेव॥4-54
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 84

4-54. Poornaprajna still an adolescent, soon became a celebrity with his
astonishing activities (wisdom) and his fame disseminated in the world
destroying the ignorance of the eligibles and delighting the virtuous like the
lustrous sun dispelling the darkness of the night and the pleasant moon-light
blooming white lotuses.
इनि श्रीमत्कनव-कुल-निलक-नत्रनवक्रम-पनडििाचार-यसिु
श्री-िारारण-पनडििाचार-यनवरनचिे श्री-मध्व-नवजरे महा-काव्ये-आिन्दानङ्किे चर्र्ुाः
य सगाः
य
पञ्चमाः सगाः
य [5-52]
वदेान्त-नवद्या-निज-राज्य-पालिेसङ्कल्प्यमािो गरुुणा गरीरसी।
अदभ्र-चिेा अनभ-नषच्यिेपरुा स वानरनभवानय
रज-पनूरिर
ै
र्॥5-1॥
5-1. Afterwards, the preceptor Achuthapreksha contemplating to enthrone
Poornaprajna being convinced of his competence, coronated him with holy
waters in the sacred conch and entrusted him with the governance of his
Supreme Vedanta empire.
आिन्द-रपस्य परस्य पात्र-धीाः आिन्द-सन्दानर-स-ुशाि-कृि स् रि।्
आिन्द-िीर्ने
ि पदंगरु नदिंबभवू िस्यात्यिरु प-रपकम॥्5-2॥
5-2. Poornaprajna with his mind fully dedicated to Lord Vishnu, composing
the bliss-yielding Shastra for the emancipation of the eligibles received
(another) extremely befitting name Anandatirtha (a synonym for the Vedic
word Madhwa) at the holy hands of his revered teacher.
कदा-नचदत्रोप-ररौ रनिाः सिा गोनवन्द-बद्धुबे हु
य-नशष्य-सवं िृ ाः।
अमष्यु नशष्या अिमुाि-नशनक्षिााः िदाऽनजगीषि ग् रुु-बनुद्धमद्धुिााः॥5-3॥
5-3. Once, a Saint, a friend of Achuthapreksha came to Udupi with his
presumptuous followers specialized in logic who desired to vanquish
Poornaprajna in disputation.
नभदा स-ुसाध्यत्ये ि-ुमािमत्र िैाः प्रारज्यु िाऽऽशुप्रनि-पक्ष-भीषणम।्
अिडिरद ्व्यक्तमिडि-धीनरदम स् पक्ष-दक्षाः फनणिंनव-रानिव॥5-4॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 85

5-4. The arrogant disciples holding the view that difference could be
substantiated with ease only by logic (Anumana) hurled an inference
dreadful to hostiles which Poornaprajna, a master-logician and a formidable
controversialist controverted like Garuda, the king of birds with his stout
wings lacerating the serpents.
अर्ानप नमथ्या नवमिंमि-त्विो नववाद-निमक्त
य
ु -वनदत्यवानद िैाः।
अििे सत्यंनव-मिंमि-त्विो रर्ा घटादीत्यिमुा न्यगद्यि॥5-5॥
5-5. Unable to confute him they put forth another inference ‘The world, the
subject of controversy is false because it is seen like silver in nacre’. The
Acharya instantly replied with a counter-argument. ‘The world is real
because it is seen, like the pot and cloth and other things.’
हेिोरनि-व्यानप्तरवानद िर
ै
द
य
ा स-कौिकु
ै
स्तणूम
य
सावनवस्मराः।
ि शनुक्त-रप्यानद मिंरदन्यर्ा मिंिनदत्यानद वदि न्जगार िाि॥्5-6॥
5-6. Surprised with the quick repartee of the Great Acharya, the disputants
instantly replied that his reason being seen suffers from the fallacy of overpervasion. Madhwacharya without being baffled cut their argument forthwith
by asserting: ‘There is no seeing in the real sense of the term but an
erroneous perception of a thing that is not there’ (as the eye fails to contact
the silver seen in the nacre being false) and vanquished them out-right.
(Thus Tarkatirtha propounds his Abhinava-Anyatha-Kyathi-Vada or the
theory of wrong perception in a new form).
ित्त्वेऽप्यित्त्वेनवमिऽेिमुांवदि ि्दप्रनिष्ठांप्रनि-पादकाः स्वरम।्
नव-नजत्य नवश्वाि न्वदषांसभास्वसौ जगाम िाम्नाऽप्यि-ुमाि-िीर्ि
य
ाम॥्5-7॥
5-7. Demonstrating dexterously that in cases of objects debated, (maybe)
real or unreal, counter replies can be regularly and successfully given, he
went on to prove once for all, that Inference by itself can never be an
independent valid instrument (it can be valid only when backed by
Pratyaksha and Vedas) and conquered all the opponents in the learned
assembly and secured the title, Anumanatirtha for having routed the TarkikaVada.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 86

समस्त-वादीन्द्र-गज-प्र-भङ्ग-दाः चरन्नवन्यांप्रनि-पक्ष-कािरा।
वदे-निषांराः प्रर्माः समाररौ स वानद-नसहं ोऽत्र स-बनुद्ध-सागराः॥5-8॥
5-8. The learned Bouddha by name Vadisimha, who had conquered all the
prominent proud disputants (Elephants), the leader among the despisers of
the Vedas, along with another eminent pundit Buddhisagara travelling over
the earth in search of rival confutant, came to Udupi.
(This Vadisimha, a Vaiseshika had become a follower of Buddhisagara.)
िस्योरु-दगव
य-यविो जीगीषरा निशािमादत्त मकुुन्द-धीर्द्ु
य
िम।्
स्व-नशष्य-हस्तिे मठान्तरषे-ुधाःे स-ुपक्ष-दक्षंसिु -िीर्-य
मागण
य
म॥्5-9॥
5-9. Achuthapreksha wishing to defeat Buddhisagara swollen with superarrogance, sent for Sukhatirtha competent to uphold his tenets, through a
disciple of his staying in another monastery, to debate with the hostile
opponent like a warrior picking up a sharp, fiery arrow from his quiver to rout
his adversaries.
चत्र
ैंप्र-नजज्ासुकुिहूलाकुलं िणृ ांकुलं प्र-त्वनरिंनि-शामरि।्
अवन्दिोपत्ये गरुुं गनरष्ठ-धीाः स रप्य-पीठारििोत्तम-नस्थिम॥्5-10॥
5-10. Poornaprajna, discerning the people moving in throngs in great haste,
curious to see the winner in the disputation, hied to the abode of
Achuthapreksha at Udupi and bowed to him in reverence.
स वानदनसहं स्य नगरंगरीरसीमिडिरत्नडििमडिलान्तर।े
िीक्ष्णिे वाक्यिे नमििे वनेगिा गदांशरणे वे नवशारदो महुाः॥5-11॥
5-11. Madhwacharya, An expert in logistic refuted time and again the
protracted and weighty argument of Vadisimha by his pithy, acute and quick
counter-arguments in the assembly of the learned like a skilled warrior
smashing a big mace by some speedy sharp arrow.
असावसरूि न्ि-िव-प्रकारिो व्यचीक्लपि क् निदर्ार्म
य
च्चुक
ै
ाः।
जगद-्नव-जिेष्
ुच जरेस-सशं राः िावज्जिोऽजारि पणू -य
चिेसाः॥5-12॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 87

5-12. Afterwards, when the defeated Vadisimha boiling with ill-will picked up
a topic and vehemently put forth no less than eighteen alternatives and
questioned in a high pitch, even the congregation reared a doubt as to the
success of Madhwacharya in the disputation.
नवकल्प-कोटीरर् िडिरि र्द््ु
िंरजे ऽेनधकं स्मरे-मिु ो बहृ न्मनिाः।
िमस्तिीवा
य
द्य-ुमनणनवश
य
द्धुरा गवा नश्रिो नवष्ण-ुपदंसदास्पदम॥्5-13॥
5-13. Poornaprajna, devoted to the feet of Lord Vishnu, with his pleasing
smile soon shearing with extreme ease all the eighteen options of Vadisimha
with his faultless words full of incontrovertible reasonings shone like the sun
with his sacred rays dispelling the deep darkness in the sky.
अगाधमात्मन्यनि-वले मद्धुिंनिरस्कृिाशषे-सरस्विी-िनिम।्
कामंमहा-मािस-कुा-सावो लघचूकारत्ये नप बनुद्ध-सागरम॥्5-14॥
5-14. Madhwacharya belittled with ease the supercilious Buddhisagara of
superb talent who had conquered the hostile contestants all around like the
mighty Sage Agastya slighting the disdain of the surging sea (mightier than
all the rivers put-together) by draining it in one draught.
श्व एव वादोऽनिनि वानदिौ िलौ अद्योत्तरंभानि रदीरि
य
ानमनि।
मध्वेब्रवुाणऽेमि िौ नजिौ जिाः स निनश्चकारानप निशा-पलारिाि॥्5-15॥‘
5-15. When the evil contestants Vadisimha and Buddhisagara contended
that their confutation be continued the next day and Madhwacharya instantly
retorted that they could refute (his argument) if possible, then and there, the
assembled elite could conceive of the disastrous defeat of the dejected
disputants which later on was confirmed by their flight during the night.
बद्ध्यु नब्धिा वानद-वरणे चाऽनजि
य
ांजर-नश्ररंभ-ूपनरवनिि
य
ा नचराि।्
अहो महूुिाद
य
रमप्ररत्-वाि अ् वाप्तवानित्यनि-नवनस्मिंजिाः
ै॥5-16॥
5-16. The learned in the concourse were taken aback to see Poornaprajna
earning with extreme ease, in no time the renown garnered by the
celebrated controversialists Buddhisagara and Vadisimha labouring hard,
going round the country conquering the confutants.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 88

व्याख्याि क् दा-नचन्मनणमद-्नवनिनमि
य ंभाष्यंजिस्त
ै
क
य-नवशारदव
ै
िृय
ाः।
उवाच वाचंपनरहास-हासवाि स् म्मोद-िीर्ाः
य
सरु-मोद-दानरिीम॥्5-17॥
5-17. Once, Anandatirtha surrounded by expert logicians, adverting on the
commentary of the Brahma-Sutras composed by Maniman born on the earth
as Sankara said these words with a derisive smile that gladdened the Gods:
सि-्सत्रू-भावेप्रनवचानरिेपर्ृ ग भ्ाष्यानभ-सधौ च नव-शद्धु-बनुद्धनभाः।
निगह्यृ गढूाग्रहमग्रुमिेरोाः मान्योऽन्वरोऽन्योन्यमहो ि दृश्रि॥े 5-18॥
5-18. ‘After a searching scrutiny, with an unbiased mind devoid of obstinate
persistence, it is surprising to see that there is no happy correlation between
the import of the Sutras of Lord Badarayana and the intent (tenor) of the
commentary composed by Sankara (Alas! It lacks the excellences of a
commentary. It betrays the Original.)
इनि ब्रवुाणेप्रनि-पादरत्यलंभाष्यऽेत्र दोषाि प्र्बलाि म् हुुमहु
य
ु
ाः।
िनस्मस्तं ुनवस्मरे-दीरोऽनप रत्िो ि स्थरेसाः परह
य
रनन्नमािमी॥5-19॥
5-19. With these words, Madhwacharya pin-pointed again and again diverse
grave defects to the great astonishment of the pundits present there who
despite resolute attempts could not remove the strong blemishes.
िन्वस्य सत्रूस्य परोऽर्
य
उच्यिांरद ्भाष्य-मात्रंभविा निरस्यि।े
भवादृशर
ै
ाः
य
कनवनभि
य
दूष्यिेकर्ञ्चित्ये चू नुरमेवचनस्विाः॥5-20॥
5-20. ‘Till now you have only confuted Sankara’s commentary; a
distinguished scholar like you should interpret correctly the meaning of the
Sutrakara which will never be controverted by others’, so voiced the
eloquent pundits.
अनक्लष्ट-शब्दान्वरमषे सावि-्सत्रूार्म
य
च्चुव
ै
च
य
िंिदाऽऽदद।े
मािीकृ िाम्नार-रिु-स्मनृि क्षणाद ्एष्यत्कर्ा-िाडिव-सत्रू-धारकम॥्5-21॥
5-21. Being so entreated by the assembly, Madhwacharya commenced his
learned exhortation on the Brahmasutras based on the authoritative Vedas
and Smritis where words bore a close relation to their meanings and were
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 89

expressed in a clear and crisp manner, as a prelude to his forthcoming
Bhashya.
बभुत्सु रा मत्सर-वनजि
य
ाि ज् िाि स् -मत्सराि ्वा नव-नजगीषराऽऽगिाि।्
श्रिु-प्रवीणानि-िानक
ि
काि म् हुु
ाः भङ्ग्याऽिरा भङ्गमपुानििार साः॥5-22॥
5-22. This Madhwacharya thus (in the manner described) satisfied the
virtuous free from envy, well-versed in the Vedas and specialized in logic,
desirous of knowing the truth, with fitting replies to all their questions and
silenced the vicious full of ill-will desirous of vanquishing him by
controverting them again and again.
कदा-नचदिे ंप्रनि-गम्य सौम्य-धीाः स मध्य-गहेार-य
वर प्र-सनेदवाि।्
हेिोाः कुिनश्चद ्नव-मिी-कृ िोऽप्यहो गणुानब्ध-लुब्धाः स-ुजिाः प्र-सीदनि॥5-23॥
5-23. It is strange that Madhyagehabhatta, the pick of the wise, pure in mind,
even though embarrassed (by his son’s resolve to take the life of a recluse)
felt intensely happy to see his son grown in stature. Really Virtue is beauty:
the noble in love with it really rejoice.
िजे ोऽमिृ ंिन्दि-गात्र-पात्र-गंित्रेाञ्जनलभ्ामनपबि स् दाऽव्यरम।्
नवद्या-सधुांचास्य वचो-महा-घटेपणू ाम
य
सौ कण-य
पटुेि पनडििाः॥5-24॥
5-24. The learned Madhyagehabhatta gazed with his eyes on the eternal
splendour of Poornaprajna’s body as one quaffs off the nectar in a pot with
his two palms and ardently listened to his disquisitions full of sound wisdom
as one accepts with gratification a vessel containing ambrosia to the brim.
लीला-नववादेगरुुणा जगद-्गरुोाः प्रसङ्गिस्तत्र च िादृशेसनि।
सत्रूार्-यनवच्चिे क् ुरु भाष्यमञ्जस-ेत्याक्षपे-पवू
ं
गरुुरभ्धानदमम॥्5-25॥
5-25. During their healthy discussions while Sankara-Bhashya was being
refuted repeatedly, once Achuthapreksha, the teacher of Poornaprajna (the
preceptor of the world) said in a mood to object, quietly ‘if you have correctly
caught the true import of the Brahma-Sutras, why not compose your own
commentary on it’.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 90

नवधाि-मात्रंिदपाददेिदा परो रर्ाऽच्छं परमाः स हंसाः-राट।्
िल्लीिमाक्षपेमपुक्ष
ै
िाफलं वारीव सन्तो नह गणुाश्चं -िोनषणाः॥5-26॥
5-26. Madhwacharya the eminent saint welcomed the mandate of the master
(to write a commentary of his own on the Brahmasutras) being heedless to
the persistent, latent, fruitless objections (contained in their accidental
disquisitions) like the King-Swan separating pure milk from water. Indeed, it
is the nature of the noble to appreciate merit. (Where-ever it may be).
वैराग्र-वैरात्य-स-ुवाक्त्व-पवूक
य ै
ाः रिुो गणु
ाः
ै
पारम-हंस्य-भषूणाः
ै।
ज्यष्ठेो रनिरो नलकुचान्वरोद्भवाः िंभनूर-भनक्ताः स कदानचदब्रवीि॥्5-27॥
5-27. The elderly ascetic hailing from the ancient Likucha family a devout
devotee of Lord Hari, embellished with qualities that adorn saint-hood like
renunciation, courage and eloquence once said to Madhwacharya thus:
नवरोनध वदेान्त-कृ िान्त-सम्पदांभाष्यानदकं चनेददमस्तुका क्षनिाः।
अस्मभ्माचक्ष्वनवचक्षणोनचिंभावंिुसत्रूोपनिषद-्नववनक्षिम॥्5-28॥
5-28. ‘What loss if these commentaries now in vogue, run contrary to the
doctrine of Vedanta-Sutras. Let them exist. Oh Madhwacharya! You reveal
the real import of the Brahmasutras and Upanishads that will be acceptable
to the wise.’
इत्यस्य वाचा शरदवे भानसिा रदाऽनिलाशााः शभु-पणूर
य
ा बभौ।
प्रमोद-िीर्ाि
य
ि-चन्द्र-चनन्द्रका व्याख्यानभधा नवष्ण-ुपद-प्रकानशिी॥5-29॥
5-29. The auspicious words of the elderly ascetic expressing the
expectations of the righteous resembled the autumn lighting all the quarters
with its glow. Like the gleam of the moon embellishing the sky with its white
sheen, the delightful discourses of the Acharya on Brahmasutras and
Upanishads that distinctly manifested the nature and glory of the supreme
illumined the minds of the noble.
ज्यष्ये ि क् दानचि न्कलकाल-पानलिांनदशंप्ररािोऽच्यिु-बनुद्धिा सह।
समग्र-धीमनय
डिि-नवष्ण-ुमङ्गळं नवष्णंुजगन्मङ्गळमाििाम साः॥5-30॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 91

5-30. Poornaprajna, on one occasion moved to the South along with his
preceptor Achuthapreksha to vanquish the learned disputants and arriving at
a sacred village by name Vishnumangala bowed to the auspicious Lord
Vishnu, an ornament of the place.
नभक्षा-प्र-दात्राऽत्र परीनक्षिंुमहु
ाः दत्तेप्र-भक्तुेकदळी-फलोच्चर।े
अििे निरत्
य
मवार-यनवस्मराः िमारव
य
र
ंनवजिऽेवदद ्गरुु
ाः॥5-31॥
5-31. The revered Achuthapreksha, with irrepressible astonishment, seeing
his disciple Madhwacharya consume time and again heaps of plantains with
ease offered by a householder who had hosted the alms on that day to test
his might, said thus to him in a lone place.
नभक्षावसािेनि-शिानधक
ै
ाः फलाः
ै
व्यढू
ाः
ै
प्रभक्तु
ै
ाः पनरपनूरिऽेनप ि।े
ििदूरेिानस्त गनरष्ठिा कर्ंसनुचत्त सत्यंवदिाद ्भवानिनि॥5-32॥
5-32. ‘Oh Poornaprajna, tell us the truth as to how your belly that has
swallowed more than two hundred plump plantains after a sumptuous dinner
is yet slender and not swollen in size.’
अङ्गष्ठ
ु-मात्रंजठर-प्रनिनष्ठिंजाज्वल्यमािंमम जाि-वदेसम।्
नित्यंनहिंनवश्व-दहंच नवत्त िंनवश्वशे -चिेा इनि सोब्रवीि ि् दा॥5-33॥
5-33. Then Madhwacharya, ever contemplating Lord Hari in his mind,
conveyed thus: ‘Oh preceptor, know that there burns in my belly the fire of
the size of a thumb that is always beneficial to me; it is the conflagration
(wild-fire) that burns the whole world during the deluge.’
(Likewise he could digest the pot of boiled gram (II-38) as a child and could
gorge a cart-load of food in his former incarnation as Bhimasena and Lord
Vayu he drank the most dangerous poison unharmed.)
पराक
य
ुलािके -सरस्विी-ििीि न्य् ारोपपन्नाि न्वनवधार्-य
सरं िुाि।्
अिीत्य दशे ाि स् मराश्चं चारु-धीाः असौ जगामानभ-मििे वत्मि
य
ा॥5-34॥
5-34. Poornaprajna with his captivating intellect journeyed ahead by his
chosen route crossing diverse regions with different traditions, replete with
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 92

surging rivers and remarkable things, refuting rival doctrines advanced by
the assembled scholar’s masters on varied topics, well grounded in logic.
स्व-हेळरा पानिि-पानर्व
य-व्रजांधी-शनुद्ध-दांकेरळ-भषूणानरिाम।्
परनस्विीं प्रक्ष्ये पनर् निजानचि
य
ांस भानविीमस्मरदत्र चनडिकाम॥्5-35॥
5-35. Madhwacharya, discerning enroute the Payaswini river that fells down
the cluster of trees by the force of its flow, cleanses the minds those who
plunge in it and adorning the region adored by the birds and (Brahmins),
recollected the intended incarnation of Goddess Durga worshipped by the
holy Brahmins, and embellishment to the place of her descent who will
destroy the many ruling-demons by her indomitable daring and protect her
devotees.
ििाः क्रमणे प्र-चलन्नपुनेरवाि अ् वन्दिन्दे ीवर-सन्दु र-च्छनवम।्
अाोज-िाभंस भजुङ्ग-शानरिंश्री-वल्लभंश्रीमदिन्त-सत्रु॥े 5-36॥
5-36. Moving ahead, as per schedule, Madhwacharya arrived at
Tiruvanantapur and saluted Anant-Padmanabha, consort of Goddess
Lakshmi lying on his serpent-bed glistening with the lovely splendour of the
blue lotus.
वदेान्त-सत्रूानण कृिान्त नवि-्िमो व्याख्यादसौ नशष्य-गणार ससं नद।
नव-लक्षणंजीव-गणाद ्गणुाणव
य ंब्रह्माच्यिुाख्यंप्रनि-पादरि म् हुु
ाः॥5-37॥
5-37. Madhwacharya, the distinguished interpreter of Vedanta discoursing
on the sutras of Lord Vedavyasa to his disciples in the assembly of the
learned, highlighted repeatedly that Brahman designated as Achutha is full
of infinite auspicious attributes and is entirely different from the finite Jivas.
अप्राशं -ुित्ोप ू -पदानद-वास-जाः स सङ्करो वैर-परारणाः पिु
ाः।
असरूरोचऽेत्र महािनि-क्रमाः सत्रूार्-यवादोऽकृ ि-भाष्यकेनष्वनि॥5-38॥
5-38. The vindictive Sankara the despiser of Mukhyaprana born again in the
Kudipusturu clan inflamed with ill-will from Madhwacharya so propagating
the majesty of the supreme, accused him that it was a transgression of the
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 93

bonds of decorum to discourse on the Sutras off-hand without composing a
commentary.
वदोत्तरम भ्ानि रदीह कुमह
य ेभाष्यंकृनििास्य
य नह दडि-वानरिा।
जगद-्गरुणानमनि िांगरुोनगर
यंजिाः समस्तोऽनभििन्द स-नस्मिाम॥्5-39॥
5-39. All the people who had assembled there greatly appreciated the words
of Madhwacharya, the preceptor of the world, spoken with a pleasing smile:
‘you are at liberty to answer our objections, if you can. We will shortly
compose our Bhashya. Of course, there is no royal decree denying the right
to compose a commentary.’
प्राज्म
ै
ह
य
ा-परुूष-सव-यलक्षणैाः सम्पन्न-दहेोऽरनमिीनरिेप्रभौ।
परेपरस्याप्यनि-पीििा-दृशाः नस्फङ-मात्र सशं सं िमवे चनक्रर॥े 5-40॥
5-40 When the learned in the assembly highly lauded Madhwacharya as a
prodigy possessing all the thirty-two bodily excellences, the partisans of
Kudipusturu praised out of sheer envy his adipose waist. (A sign of
ugliness).
नस्फग-्धषूणानि प्रनिपादरत्यलंसम्पणू -य
सङ्ख्यऽेस्यिुलक्ष्म-शाििाः।
िद-्दडि-सङ्खडिि-सश्रं वम व्य् धाि ि् दक्षमोऽसौ प्रकृ निनहि साऽसिाम॥्5-41॥
5-41. When Poornaprajna commented aright basing his remarks on the
science of the signs of physical excellence that fatty hips betokened a
hedions mark, Kudipusturu out of fury, took a vow even though incompetent
to carry it out that he will break his staff. (Cut his monk-staff into pieces.)
Verily such is the nature of the vicious (to take barren vows).
स्नात्वाऽत्र िीर्ष्व
े नचरणे कन्यका-िीर्
े
स-ुिीर्
े
सिु -िीर्
य
आप्लि
ु
ाः।
समर्द्ु-सिेौ च नि-मज्य नवष्णवेश्री-राम-िार्ार िमश्चकार साः॥5-42॥
5-42. With holy dips in various hallowed lakes in that place, Madhwacharya
moving further ahead plunged in the foremost pond by name Kanyatirtha.
Then enroute, arriving at the sea-bridge (Dhanushkoti) he bathed there and
bowed to Lord Hari immanent in the Rameshwara Linga installed by Lord
Ramachandra.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 94

(The sight of the bridge removes even the sin of Brahmahatya.)
िमा-व्रजन्तंरनिवषे-धानरणंदडिंप्रकाश्रष
ै
हसन्नभाषि।
िडयिे दडिो रनद चडि ि त्वरा त्वं पडिकोऽपनडिि वन्द्य-वानगनि॥5-43॥
5-43. Then Madhwacharya accousted Kudipusturu facing him in the garb of
an ascetic, showing his staff with a smile: ‘Oh foolish one, you are a victim of
fury! If you sever not this staff, then you turn to be a professed liar and a
eunuch.’
लज्जाििाः स्वार्म
य
र्ार्र
य
न्नसि उ् पक्ष्य
ै
िासौ निज-िारकैस्तदा।
आिन्दरन्तं वदिन्दे िा जगि ि्ंिेनष्ट काः प्राज्नमहेनि वानदनभाः॥5-44॥
5-44. Bent with blush, he begged the best Brahmins to back him in breaking
the Acharya’s monk-staff but they belittled him for his beastly behaviour
berating thus: ‘who can censure such a celestial who charms the cosmos
with his beaming, beautiful (moon-like) countenance?’
रा-रााः प्रसक्तााः पनरषत्सुपरुूषाः
ैनवद्यानवदग्धनै
वनय
वधाः
ै
समागम।े
स िास-ुिासुप्रनिभानि-भासरुो नवद्यासुनवद्यानद-पनिनजग
य
ार िाि॥्5-45॥
5-45. Madhwacharya with his prodigious talent glistened, vanquishing all the
pundits assembled in the learned gathering specialized in various branches
of scriptural learning during disputations on different topics relating to
diverse Shastras.
अचाल्यमािाः स-गरुु
ाः स चापलाः
ै
असज्जिािामबलीरसानमह।
उवास मासाश्चं िरुो महा-मिााः नसहं ो गहुान्तोप-गिाः शिुानमव॥5-46॥
5-46. Unruffled by the rash activities of the weak-wicked, the solemn
Madhwacharya dwelt in Rameshwara with his preceptor during the
Chaturmasya period, like the dauntless lion dwelling in its den remaining
undisturbed by the bark of the feeble dogs.
शृङ्गार-नसधंुस भजुङ्ग-शानरिंश्रीरङ्ग-वासंकृि-मङ्गलम स् िाम।्
अमन्द-धीदव
े
मवन्दिाऽऽगिाः कवरे-कन्या-नहम वारुसनेविम॥्5-47॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 95

5-47. Poornaprajna arriving at holy Srirangam bowed with deep devotion to
Lord Ranganatha, propitious to the noble, lying on the serpent-bed served
with intense affection (fanned) by the cool breezes of the Kaveri river.
(one of the eight sacred places where the Supreme has manifested himself –
Swayam-vyakta.)
ििो निवत्तृ ाः परमवे परुूषंप्रणम्य िािारििषे ुस-ंचरि।्
प्र-काशरि स्व् ानि-शरािमािषुाि आ् शामदुीचीं प्र-ररावसौ क्रमाि॥्5-48॥
5-48. Returning from Srirangam Madhwacharya saluting enroute, the
supreme Lord Narayana immanent in all idols in various temples journeyed
in the northern direction manifesting his divine majesty.
ििस्तिो नवनस्मि-लोचिि
ै
र
य
ाः
ैनिरीक्ष्यमाणोऽनि-स-ुलक्षणाकृ निाः।
ग्रामोत्तमाि प्र्ाप्य परनस्विी-िटेनववशे दवेारििंस नकञ्चि॥5-49॥
5-49. Madhwacharya, with his lustrous body graced with all the excellences,
witnesses by the people with wondrous eyes, during his visits to the
prominent villages, (at last) entered a temple on the banks of the Payaswini
river.
अदीत्य धमण
े
षिङ्गमागमंिदर्-य
स-ंवणि
य -निणर
य
ानन्विााः।
प्रापनुिज
ि
न्द्रे ास्तमपवू-य
परुूषंनजज्ासवाः स-ुप्रनर्िंजगि-्त्रर॥े 5-50॥
5-50. Many eminent Brahmins who had studied the Vedas with its auxiliary
Shastra’s in the prescribed manner and had the competence to interpret
their import correctly assembled there, curious to see and acquaint
themselves with this unique person Madhwacharya of profound intellect,
famed in the three worlds.
स-ुनस्मिन्दे मरनवन्द-लोचिंस्वण-य
वणम
य नि-भर्द्-भाषणम।्
वीि-भषूमनप नवश्व-भषूणंिंनददृक्षरुलमापिज्जिाः॥5-51॥
5-51. Even the common crowd rushed to the place to have a sight of
Madhwacharya, the embellishment of the universe even though unadorned,
with a glowing yellow form having a resplendent beautiful face (like the
moon), a pleasing smile, broad lovely lotus-like eyes and a sweet tongue.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 96

नवद्योरु-द्यनुि-धीर-िारक-निरस्कारेपिङ्गानरिो
दवाद
य ीभ-कुिक
य-कुा-दलिेनसहं -प्रबहानय
रिाः।
लोलालोकक-लोक-दृक-्कुमनुदिी-सह्लं ादिऽेब्जानरिाः
ससं न्मडिल-मडििानरि उि स्वािन्द-िीर्ो बभौ॥5-52॥
5-52. Anandatirtha with his flashing form adorned the assembly packed with
pundits, defeating the celebrated disputants proud of their wisdom like the
glittering sun shadowing the twinkling stars, courageously cutting the
adverse arguments of the (evil) crooked confutants like a brave lion shearing
the temples of the mighty elephants and pleasing the people with eager eyes
like the moon delighting the longing lotuses.
इनि श्रीमत्कनव-कुल-निलक-नत्रनवक्रम-पनडििाचार-यसिु
श्री-िारारण-पनडििाचार-यनवरनचिे श्री-मध्व-नवजरे महा-काव्ये-आिन्दानङ्किे
पञ्चमाः सगाः
य
षष्ठाः सगाः
य - [6-57]
ऐिररे मर् नकञ्चि सक्तूं सचूरि स् दनस ित्र गनरष्ठाः।
श्रोिनुमच्छनि सभा भगवद्भ्ाः सक्तू -भावनमनि िावदवाच॥6-1॥
6-1. An elderly learned in the gathering, referring to a certain Sukta in the
Aitareya Shakha entreated the Acharya thus: ‘This assembly longs to know
its real import from a celebrated person like you.’
वण-यसौष्ठव-गनरष्ठमिणू
ं
िल्यु -मात्रमनि-मात्र-स-ुलक्ष्म।
व्यढू हृज्जलद-घोषममष्यु ो-च्चारणंनव-दधदभ्नधिार्म
य ॥्6-2॥
6-2. Madhwacharya recited the Sukta with all its rare excellences like clarity
of words, lack of speed and equal syllabic measure and elucidated its true
meaning with a voice solemn like that of a cloud.
लक्षणानन्वि-िरा वचिऽेनस्मि द्वेिा-गरुुमसावनि-शिे ।े
मािनमत्यनप नवधार नधरा िेिि ि् ुसक्तू मपरार्म
य
वोचि॥्6-3॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 97

6-3. Though these learned Brahmins realized that Madhwacharya far
excelled even the preceptor of the Gods (Brihaspati) in pronouncing and
interpreting the Vedas with all their exquisite marks and revered him in their
own minds, yet (out of ill-will) they construed the Sukta in question in a
different manner.
स्याि ि्र्त्थे मनप स-ंभनविाऽर्ाः
य
त्र्यर्ि
य
ांश्रनुिष ुनवत्त दशार्म
य ।्
भारिंििुशिार्म
य नप स्याद ्वष्ण
ै
वंपद-सहस्र-िरंनह॥6-4॥
6-4. ‘Try to recognize that the Vedic hymns carry three meanings and the
Mahabharata verses admit ten imports while Vishnusahasranama makes
room for senses a hundred in measure; so saying Madhwacharya ratified
both the versions put forth for the Sukta in question.’ (Your version is also
correct and mine too and even a third one is feasible.)
इत्यदुीररनि नवस्तिृ -नचत्तेभ-ूसरुा इह नजगीषव एिम।्
ऊचरुर्-य
शिकं हनर-िाम्नांवडरि
य
ानमनि स-हास-मिु ास्त॥े 6-5॥
6-5. When Poornaprajna was thus expatiating, the erudite Brahmins with a
desire to vanquish him in confutation asked him with a sly smile to
enumerate the hundred meanings of a word in Vishnusahasranama as
avowed.
वणर
य
ानम िदहंसकलं वाः सौष्ठवादि-ुवदन्तुभवन्ताः।
िंवदन्तनमनि िऽेर् वदन्तो बाढनमत्यनि-दृढोद्यममापाः
ु॥6-6॥
6-6. ‘Well, I shall give out all the hundred meanings of the word in
Vishnusahasranama (on this condition); let all of them recounted by me be
repeated by you in all their elegance.’ The Brahmins accepted this challenge
with a firm resolve.
प्रत्यर-प्रकृ नि-सङ्गम-भङ्गीं शब्द-शाि-नवनहिांप्रनिदश्र।य
शद्धु-धीाः श्रनुि-नशराः-शि-नसद्धाि अ् भ्दाि स् पनद नवश्व-पदार्ाि
य ॥्6-7॥
6-7. Madhwacharya of an immaculate mind began to narrate the varied
meanings of Vishwa, the first word of Vishnusahasranama on the solid basis
of the code prescribed in the science of grammar, showing the methodology
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 98

of the relation between the root of the word and the suffix, as determined in
the diverse Upanishads.
रावदर्-य
शिकं ि नवशङ्काः सन्तिोनक्त-कृदपपूरुदषेाः।
वनणि
य
ावधनृि-दबल
य -नचत्तााः िावदाकुल-हृदो ह्यभवस्तं ॥े 6-8॥
6-8. Before the Acharya could terminate the enumeration of the varied
senses of the word Viswa given out in quick succession with the least shade
of doubt; the Brahmins were heavily embarrassed as their weak minds
proved incompetent to retain the manifold meanings (gushing out of his
mouth).
साङ्ग-वदे-चिरुा इनिहासेनशनक्षिााः स-ुबहवोऽप्यनि-धष्टृ ााः।
िि
ै
दीनरिमहो जगहुृस्तेनवश्व-सिर-परोऽध-ुगणा वा॥6-9॥
6-9. Those learned highly confident Brahmins, many in number though
specialized in the Vedas with its auxiliaries, experts in the epics like
Mahabharata, failed to chase the virile mind of Madhwacharya (the strength
of his mind eluded their grasp) like flood of the deluge overflowing the
numerous wells.
(A fine instance of his profuse learning.)
दवेिास्वसलुभा प्रनिभा िेमािषुषे ुचपलेष ुकर्ा का।
क्षाम्य सौम्य सकल-ज् िमस्तेिेब्रवुन्त इनि िंनकल िमेाः
ु॥6-10॥
6-10. ‘Oh omniscient Madhwacharya! Such splendorous talent is hard to be
traced even in the Gods. Then why talk of fickle-minded human beings? Oh,
gentle one! pardon us (for our presumptuousness) and accept our
salutations. So saying they bowed to him in all reverence.
वदे-शाि-चिरुनै
रह नवद्या-नवत्त-नलिनुभरवाप्तमशषेाः
ै।
प्राप केरळ-स-ुमडिल-जािैाः अन्यदारििमारि-चिेााः॥6-11॥
6-11. Poornaprajna approached another temple on the bank of the
Payaswini river where assembled many men of learning who hailed from the
chosen Kerala region, well-versed in the Vedas and Scriptures keen on
securing consideration for their scholarship.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 99

िक
य-िन्त्र-कुशलािनप पसंु
ाः चक
य
रीनि बि सोऽरममािाि।्
मािमािमरिीह कर्ंिो िष
ै
मडिल-भवुांसनमिािाम॥्6-12॥
6-12. ‘Alas! This reputed Madhwacharya has purged the pride of even
pundits (highly) proficient in Logic and Mimansa. Likewise he will refute us,
who have gathered here from the Kerala land and destroy our self-esteem.’
मन्त्ररन्त इनि िेनिज-वरााः
य
अन्य-दशे ज-मिु ास्तमपच्छृ ि।्
सद-्ददादद-स-ुशसं ि-निन्दा-कानर-सक्तू -गिमर्म
य
पुत्ये ॥6-13॥
6-13. Contemplating thus, these eminent Brahmins (to save their faces) led
the other group of Brahmins born in other places and urged them to question
Madhwacharya the import of the Vedic Sukta (Dan Sukta) in Rigveda (X117-1) which extols those who are charitable to the righteous and slanders
those that are not.
िंस्फुटं प्र-कर्रि स् पणृ ीरा-च्छब्द-मलू मवदि प्णृ -धािमु।्
िंनजगीषमुर् नवप्र-मदाः प्री-धािमुषे नि-गदन्तमवुाच॥6-14॥
6-14. Madhwacharya lucidly elucidating the meaning of the ‘Na Va U Deva’
gift-hymn (Dan Sukta) told them that the word ‘Pruniyat’ is derived from the
root (Pruna to pass as gift). Then a pundit awaiting an opportunity to
vanquish him retorted that the root word was Preeng-Prinane (and not the
one he had pointed out).
प्रानदभदेमनवदि ग्णुर त्वंमढू पासं षुुनलिि न्लनप-सङ्म।्
भत्सरनन्ननि जहास स-ुहासो मत्सराकुल-नधरो जिरि स् ाः॥6-15॥
6-15. Acharya said thus to him, ‘Oh! unenlightened one, you who are
unaware of the divergence between Pra and Pree, study them by writing
these letters on the sand repeatedly and thus frightening silenced them, and
ridiculed the learned group burning with malice with his gentle smile.
िि प्र्सङ्ग-बलिोऽनिल-नवद्या-पाटवंपर्ृ -ुहृदाः प्रनिबद्ध्यु ।
आिमि स् -बहु-मािममी िंरंिमनन्त नकल िानक-निकारााः॥6-16॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 100

6-16. Having realized the innate genius and Omni-science of Poornaprajna
when he explained the meaning of the hymn, they respectfully bowed to
(Madhwacharya) who is highly revered by the host of Gods.
कन्यकादृि-सरुन्द्रे -वपाः
ु-श्री-दाि-वानच-वर-सक्तू -हृदक्तौ।
कुत्रनचि स् दनस िावदपाला कीनिि
य
ाऽनि िरुणीत्यरमचू॥े 6-17॥
6-17. Discoursing on the famous hymn in Rig-Veda (VIII-91-7) in another
assembly which narrates how Devendra, being pleased with the devotion of
a maiden favoured her with a form similar in shine to that of the sun
Madhwacharya revealed its real import and interpreted the word ‘Apala’ in
the Sukta to mean a young Damsel.
नश्वनत्रणी भवनि िि-्पद-वाच्य-ेत्याग्रहेण वदिोऽनवदषोत्र।
कनश्चदष्ये नि नवपनश्चनदहि
ै ंपच्छृ ित्ये रमगच्छदर्ोक्त्वा॥6-18॥
6-18. Retorting to the persistence of the (so-called) learned without any valid
reasonings in regard to the meaning of the world ‘Apala’ which to him
connoted ‘a leper’, Madhwacharya advised to await the arrival of another
erudite there and get his interpretation verified (enquire of him the meaning
of the word in question) and so saying, moved ahead.
दशे मिेमनचरादप-रािाः िादृशाकृ निरहो कृ ि-बनुद्धाः।
िास्तं र्ाऽभ्नधि ित्द-भावंसनूर-मौनल-मनणिाऽत्र रर्ोच॥े 6-19॥
6-19. Verily it is startling to know that there came on the scene the scholar
as foretold bearing the very marks of physical excellence who (when asked)
gave out the same meaning as was decided on by Madhwacharya, the
crest-jewel among the learned.
केवलं ि सकलााः श्रनुि-नवद्यााः माि-पवूक
य -समस्त-नगरोऽस्य।
अप्यिागि-गि-प्रनिपनत्तंश्रद ्दधाः
ुपर्ृ लु -चिेस एि॥े 6-20॥
6-20. The learned Brahmins not only realised that Poornaprajna was highly
proficient in all Vedic learning but in faith believed that he was omniscient
and could verily peep into the past and future.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 101

रद-्रदवे सपनद प्रकृिंस्याि ्िि-्िदषे रदवदेनिलंच।
सवद
य
ा सदनस सव-य
बधुािांसवनय
वद-्रनिनरनि प्रनर्िोऽभिू॥्6-21॥
6-21. Madhwacharya who could not with competence and courage expatiate
on any topic that came for discussion in any assembly in all its thoroughness
earned enough repute and was highly esteemed as Sarvajnacharya (the allknowing yati) in all places.
अप्ररािमनप दशे मशषेंव्यािशेस-ुजि-कैरव-बधाः
ु।
पणू -य
दृक्प्र-ििरा निज-कीत्या
य
पणू -यचन्द्र इव चनन्द्रकराऽलम॥्6-22॥
6-22. Even though Poornaprajna, the well-wisher of the virtuous could not
visit all places during his extensive journey through the country, his fame as
the ‘all-knower’spread far and wide like the effulgence of the moon lighting
the entire land.
सन्दु रषे ुसरु-मनन्दर-वन्दृ -ेनष्वनन्दरा-रमण-वन्दि-कृत्यम।्
आ-चरन्नसनुचराि स् -ुनवचारो रप्य-पीठ-पनिमाप मकुुन्दम॥्6-23॥
6-23. Paying obeisance to Lord Narayana (consort of Goddess
Mahalakshmi) in all the lovely temples he came across during his whirlwind
tour, Madhwacharya of exemplary thought returned to Udupi and bowed to
Lord Ananteshwara.
(Verses from 24 to 31 (that have to be read at one stretch) form a Kulaka
and yield a double meaning one pertaining the heap of Vedas and the other
to Goddess Bharati, the presiding deity of the Vedas manifesting herself as
Droupadi. They are strung in stanzas with a set of words so selected as to
suit both contexts: Indeed it is a delectable intellectual excise.
भ-ूसरु-प्रवर-बनुद्ध-समृनद्ध-व्यक्त-रक्तु -वपषुंरुनचराङ्गीम।्
सत्रू-दीप्त-मनण-मानलकराऽलं भनूषिांभवुि-भषूण-भिूाम॥्6-24॥
6-24. The Vedas manifested in the mighty illumined minds of the meritorious
sages (like Vasistha and Vamadeva) with its salient adjuncts (like Shiksha,
Vyakarana) decked with a rich garland of resplendent Sutra-pearls, worthy of
worship in all the three worlds, like Goddess Bharati, (the presiding deity of
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 102

the Vedas) revealing herself in the sacrifice performed by Brahmajnanis like
Yaja and Upayaja, in her splendorous form with charming limbs as Droupadi,
the embellishment of the universe glowing with a necklace of glistening
gems.
पाद-सन्दु र-पद-क्रम-भावाः
ै
भानसिांप्रकट-वण-य
गणुाढ्ाम।्
भारिोत्तम-भिृ ामिरु पा-च्छादिांसमनधक-स्वर-शोभाम।्6-25॥
6-25. The heap of Vedas glistening with the beautiful word-order and deep
import of the fourth part of the Rk, enriched with the clarity of the words and
the like, containing rich content as elucidated in celebrated epics like
Bharata masked in meaning (un-understandable by the ineligibles) decked
with classic tunes like udatta, resembled Droupadi fascinating with the
graceful movements of her lovely feet and tripping gait, endowed with
precious qualities like devotion to Lord Hari, wedded to the Pandavas the
pick of the Bharata clan, draped in rich raiments and gifted with a sonorous
throat (voice).
राजसरू-मिु -सन्मि-वत्तृ ांवासदुवे-गणु-निनष्ठि-भावाम।्
सव-य
धम-यपनर-नशक्षण-दक्षांवनन्दिांजििरा जििीवि॥्6-26॥
6-26. The hymns (collection) in the Vedas recited with respect in all
celebrated sacrifices like Rajasuya, audaciously affirming the ascendency of
Lord Vishnu, able to educate the adherents, adored by all as their divine
Mother appeared similar to Droupadi participating in all several sacrifices like
Rajasuya as the partner of Dharmaraja with a firm faith in the auspicious
attributes of Lord Krishna, dexterous in delivering the dharmic discipline,
saluted by her subjects as their mother.
मौनल-सङ्ग्रह-नव-कषण
य -दूिांमानरिा सदनस दष्ट-जििे।
न्यार-मागम
य
प-हार महान्तंस्वश्वे रत्वमनप साधरिाऽलम॥्6-27॥
6-27. The cluster of Vedas accepted in the assembly of the erudites as
authoritative but aggrieved being abused by the Adwaitins (Mayavadins) by
their forced interpretations, who unabashed asserted ‘I am Brahman’
appeared like Droupadi being distressed, dragged by the devilish
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 103

Dushasana, claiming himself as her master, discarding the decisive dictates
of Dharma.
सज्जिैाः कनिपरैरनि-दीिैाः चानलिैाः कनल-बलाच्छुभ-मागाि
य ।्
अप्यपुनेक्षि-नवकषण
य -दाःिांसानि-शोकमनप क
ै
श्चि दृष्टाम॥्6-28॥
6-28. The collection of Vedas misconstrued by the Mayavadins was
discerned with apathy by the feeble righteous, faltered from the pious path
due to the influence of the Kali age, while some sages simply saw with
severe sufferance like Droupadi while being maltreated by the malicious
Dushasana being gazed upon with non-chalance by the noble like Bhishma
and others who were debilitated (disheartened) and had deviated from the
righteous path due to the sway of cruel Kali while the virtuous like Vidura
and the Karma-sakshi Gods like Surya, shed tears.
वासदुवे धरणीधर िार्-ेत्यच्चुक
ै
रनप महुु
ाः प्र-वदन्तीम।्
पणू -य
सद-्गणुमजंगि-दोषंनबभ्रिीं हृनद नवनवक्तमशषेाि॥्6-29॥
6-29. The heap of Vedas propagating times without number the supremacy
of Lord Narayana at the top of its voice, claiming him as Vasudeva, bearer of
the cosmos, lord of the world, replete with propitious qualities and untouched
by blemishes, the unborn, strange and entirely distinct from the universe
bore resemblance to Droupadi screaming aloud in distraction praying Lord
Krishna incessantly, contemplating him as Vasudeva, master and bearer of
creation full of auspicious attributes, free from faults, unique and totally
different from existence.
वारि
य
ांबधु-जिि
ै
ि
य
ुहाहा िष
ै
धम
य
इनि चानभ-दधािाम।्
कृ ष्ण-लानळि-िमामिवद्यांअप्यिन्य-शरणांशरणोत्का॥ं 6-30॥
6-30. The aggregate of faultless (Apourusheya) Vedas lauded by Lord
Vedavyasa, longing for defence from Madhwacharya who alone could guard
them, agitated in agony against their aspersers and asked their adherents to
avert their assailants: ‘alas, this asseveration of identity of the Atma (Jiva)
and Paramatma is inauspicious’ like Droupadi devoid of defects, declaiming
in distress to the dauntless like Bhishmacharya to deter the devil
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 104

(Dushasana) from the despicable disrobing, yearning protection from Lord
Krishna: ‘Alas, this dice-play is dishonest: Bhimasena alone can defend.’
वनेदजानमव परुा भरिाग्र्याः स स्वरंश्रनुि-िनिंिलु दृष्ट्वा।
पष्टु-बनुद्धरकरोि क् रुणानब्धाः दष्ट-पक्ष-दमि-नस्थर-सधाम॥्6-31॥
6-31. Poornaprajna plenteous in mercy who discerned the merciless
Mayavadins desecrating the sacred Vedas took a solemn vow to controvert
the Adwaita doctrine like Bhimasena in days of yore seeing the ruthless
Dushasana pulling the holy hair of Droupadi, the presiding deity of the
Vedas, making a firm resolve to destroy the rival-demons.
अव्यरंसििमप्यपु-भक्त्यु ा नवत्तमग्र्यनमव दूर-नररासाः
ु।
ज्यारसेस-गरुवेहनर-गीिा-भाष्यमषे नव-रचय्य िदाऽदाि॥्6-32॥
6-32. Madhwacharya intending to proceed to Badarikashrama composed a
commentary of Srimad Bhagwadgita and gave it to his affectionate preceptor
Achuthapreksha the elderly ascetic (to muse on) as a (substitute) in his
absence like a rich man desirous of a distant tour, handing over a huge sum
to his dear ones that will never drain even when put to maximum use.
(The inexhaustibility and the richness of the contents of the commentary on
the Song-Divine is highlighted. It contains a mine of meaning and is ever a
target for the research scholars.)
हेि-ुवानदनि नवशङ्कट-बद्धुौ िीर्म
य
र्र
य नि गन्तमुिज्ुाम।्
िांनददशे परुुशोत्तम-िीर्ाः
य नचन्तरि स् परुुशोत्तम-रक्षाम॥्6-33॥
6-33. Achuthapreksha gave his assent to his disciple Poornaprajna who
sought his consent to go on a sacred pilgrimage putting forth spacious
reasons (to fulfil a divine mission), invoking divine blessings to shield him
during his holy journey.
िीरजा मलर-मडिल-वत्त्यृ ा श्लानघिो भनुव सदाळ्रि-ुरािाः।
साध-ुपाि-पनर-िापमपास्यि उ्त्तरांनदशमरान्मरुदशं ाः॥6-34॥
6-34. Like the dust-free, scented wind blowing on the sandal trees in the
Malaya mountains in the northern direction (followed by the bees) for the
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 105

benefit (happiness) of the tourists alleviating their agony of heat,
Madhwacharya, the incarnation of Lord Vayu, untouched by the Rajasic
quality, accompanied by his worthy disciples, highly esteemed on earth for
controverting the vile confutants, travelled to the North dispelling the
ignorance of the virtuous wayfarers (with the nectar of his advice).
बनुद्ध-शनुद्ध-कर-गो-निकराढ्ंिीर्-य
जािमभुरंच धरडराम।्
आत्म-मज्जिि एव निकामंपरश
य ोधरदमन्द-मिीषाः॥6-35॥
6-35. Poornaprajna purified the two types of Tirthas on earth: (1) the wealth
of words contained in the sacred scriptures (purging them of the impurities
like interpolations and misinterpretations) and (2) the holy rivers and lakes
by his pious dips that sanctify the minds of the devout.
(Tirtha means holy waters. It also connotes the sacred scriptures.
Madhwacharya consecrated both by his plunge and deep study
respectively.)
वासदुवे-पद-सन्ति-सङ्गी िजे साऽप्यलमधाः-कृ ि-शवाः
य।
अत्यविि
य नििान्तमर्ासौ गाङ्गमोघमघ-िाशि-कीनिाः
य॥6-36॥
6-36. Madhwacharya (incarnation of Lord Vayu) higher in cadre and greater
in prowess compared to Maheshwara, eternally devoted to the sublime feet
of Lord Narayana, extirpating the sins of those that just listen to his glory,
crossed the river Ganges on his way far excelling her by his innate majesty.
(The holy Ganges is sanctimonious because of her contact with one foot of
Lord Narayana once and her being willingly borne by Mahesha on his head.)
ित्र-ित्र स जगि-्त्रर-नचत्रंकम
य
शम-य
दमि-ुस्मनृि-मात्राि।्
स-ंचरि न्व-दधदाप िराणांगोचरंबदनरकाश्रम-पाश्वम
य ॥्6-37॥
6-37. Madhwacharya performing such extraordinary feats that excited the
wonder of the three worlds in the sacred places that came across during his
long journey, a recollection of which yields immense delight, at last arrived
near the (lower) Badarikashrama which is visited by the devotees.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 106

मडिरि भ् रि-िडिमिडिंिानदरारण-पदोऽत्र परो राः।
िंिमि प्र्चरु-धीहनय
र-गीिा-भाष्यमापर
य
दपारिमस्म॥ै 6-38॥
6-38. Poornaprajna paid his obeisance to the supreme Lord Narayana full of
infinite auspicious attributes, the embellishment of Bharatdesa and
presented him a pleasing gift – his commentary on Srimad Bhagavad-Gita.
(Bare-handed one must not visit the temple or see the preceptor. The Lord
loves those who are engaged in disseminating knowledge divine.)
प्रीिरऽेस्य परुिो वर-भाष्यंवाचरि स् जििामप-सार।य
वनि शनक्ति उरु-क्रम-गीिा-भाष्यनमत्यकर्रि प्रुु-सङ्ख्याः॥6-39॥
6-39. Warding off the public, Poornaprajna discoursing on his exquisite
commentary on Srimad Bhagwadgita, for the pleasure of Lord Narayana
said ‘I will expound the text ‘Shaktitah’ – according to my ability’.
एिदर्मनि य -सक्ष्मू मनप त्वंशक्त एव ि रदात्थ समस्तम।्
ििे लेशि इिीह पदंस्याद ्इत्यगद्यि जगज्जिकेि॥6-40॥
6-40. Lord Narayana, the creator of the cosmos, only suggested a suitable
substitute ‘Leshatah’ for the word ‘Shaktitah’ in the benedictory verse
(towards the end) as Poornaprajna though fully informed of the subtlest
meanings of the texts had put in only a part of it (in his text) to size up
human understanding.
ििे िि-्प्रवचिेनवनहिऽेलंशश्रुवु
ाः
ुप्र-शनरिा अनप नशष्यााः।
उच्यिानमनि महुु
ाः स-पृनर्व्या-स्फालिंपदमहो हनरणोक्तम॥्6-41॥
6-41. Madhwacharya made the needed correction and completed the
exposition and while the students were sleeping Lord Narayana who arrived
there, thumped the ground (which was distinctly heard by the awakened
disciples) and bid the Acharya to discourse again.
(This Geetabhashya is approved by Lord Narayana. As it pleased him
intensely it is regarded as highly authoritative.)
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 107

शब्ध-भदेमवधार
य
िमचा-यसनन्नषडण-वपषु
ाः परमस्य।
िस्य भाव-नवदमन्द-मिीषाः प्रोनत्थिाः प्रवचिंव्यनधिभ्
ै
ाः॥6-42॥
6-42. Hearkening to the significant words ‘discourse again’ (emphatically
uttered) by the supreme Lord Narayana present in the image, Poornaprajna
realizing His purport, got up and expounded his Geetabhashya to his
devoted disciples again for his delectation.
मज्जिंव्यनधि शीिळ-गङ्गा-वानर नित्यमरुणोदर-काले।
रि स्प् शृ नन्त ि िरा नहम-भीिा अशं एष पषृ िामनधपस्य॥6-43॥
6-43. Madhwacharya the incarnation of Mukhyaprana, the Lord of winds,
had every day a plunge in the snow-cold waters of the Ganges which frights
the residents of Holy Badari even to touch it, in the early hours of the
morning at the rise of Aruna (the charioteer of the Sun-God).
काष्ठ-मौिमदधादपवासंशद्धु-मप्यकृि शद्धु-हृनद-च्छि।्
नित्यिष्टु-हनरिोष-नवशषेंनचन्तरि प्र्भमुिन्त-मठान्ताः॥6-44॥
6-44. Madhwacharya, pious by nature, ardently wishing to placate still more
the supreme Lord ever-pleased with him, meditated on Lord Narayana inside
the Badari temple and observed the vow of utter silence on an empty
stomach.
प्रर
ै
रि-्स्व-चरणेरि-नचत्तंमध्वमत्र नदि-मडिलमिेम।्
स्वाश्रमोप-गमिार मकुुन्दो दीनप्त-दृनष्ट-नवनदिागनिरन्यैाः॥6-45॥
6-45. Lord Vedavyasa, another embodiment of the supreme hied to the
temple of Narayana, recognized by his disciples by the intense dazzle of his
resplendence and prompted Madhwacharya, being gratified by his dedicated
austerities for one Mandala (forty days), to go to his hermitage at UttaraBadari.
िक्तमवे भगवत्यपु-रािेप्रोनदिेसनि सहस्र-मरीचौ।
मौिवािनलिदत्तम-नचत्ताः नशष्य-नशक्षण-पराः करुणावाि॥्6-46॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 108

6-46. The venerable Lord Vedavyasa returned the same night to his
sanctum and at sun-rise the illustrious Madhwacharya, adhering to the vow
of tanciturnity wrote thus out of kindness to apprise his devout disciples of
his trip to Uttara-Badari.
िदृेशंस्थळमलंशमल-घ्नंिास्य िीर्-य
सनललस्य समंवााः।
िास्मदनक्त-सदृशंनहि-रपंिानस्त नवष्ण-ुसदृशंििुदव
ै
म॥्6-47॥
6-47. ‘There is not place holier than Badari that can totally annihilate our
sins: no water more sanctimonious compared to the holy waters of the
Ganges; no deity to equal the excellence of supreme Narayana nor any
advice more congenial than our salutary statements.’
रानि िावदधिुव
ै
जिोऽरंव्यास-रपमनजिंप्र-नददृक्षाः
ु।
आ-व्रजनेदह ि वा स नह वदे स्वनस्त वोऽनिनि ररावर् मध्वाः॥6-48॥
6-48. ‘Eager to see Lord Narayana in his form as Lord Vedavyasa I will
proceed forthwith to his abode at Uttara Badari. Only He knows whether I
will return to this place or not. So farewell, God bless you all’ Writing thus on
a broad leaf, Madhwacharya moved on (to Badarikashrama).
िार् िार् बि िोऽत्र नविार्ाि म्ा त्यजोरु-करुणो भगविं म।्
िोनदिंस्मिृ मपीनि नह नशष्याः
ै
स्वानमिोऽनभ-मि-भङ्ग-भरिे॥6-49॥
6-49. ‘Oh! Benevolent master, oh! Beloved preceptor! Oh the ocean of
Mercy! Oh Worshipful one! In this desolate place desert not us who are
(orphans) void of resort.’ Alas, though thus aggrieved, they could not voice it
aloud, lest it might impede the intended journey of their master.
सद-्गरुोि
यनवरहंसहमािाः सत्य-िीर्-य
रनिरन्वगमि ि्म।्
रनिवारनमिरा-सिु-शािा-स्वर्म
य
ग्र्यमशृणोि प्रुु-सङ्ख्याि॥्6-50॥
6-50. The saint Satyatirtha who had the good fortune to listen to the
delightful discourses of Poornaprajna expounding the profound purport of
the Aitareya Shakha, unable to bear his parting with his pre-eminent
preceptor, out of deep devotion followed him without forethought.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 109

दग-य
माग-य
गिमप्यि-ुधावि ि्ाऽप सोऽरमरुणीभविीि।े
लीलरा स जवमा-क्रममाणंव्याश्ररान्तर-स-ुदूर-नशलास॥ु 6-51॥
6-51. Satyatirtha exerting hard to pursue Madhwacharya with all his might
unmindful of the hard, tortuous untrodden path till sunset, could not gain him
who fleeted fast striding over big unlinked boulders with extreme ease.
आ-निवृत्त-वपषुा गरुुणाऽऽराि प्र्ानणिा ह्यनभ-िरिे स-ुिन्नु
ाः।
त्रस्त-धीरनि-ररौ स महूुिाि
य
ि् द-्नदिोप-गि-मागम
य
शषेम॥्6-52॥
6-52. When Guru Madhwacharya looked back and saw (his disciple)
Satyatirtha plodding his perilous path fraught with fear, with a signal of his
palm (propelled from a distance) made him return to Anantmath traversing
the whole track covered during the course of the day, in no time, with the
least exertion.
आश्रमेनिज-जिानिह दृष्ट्वा िंप्रसाद-मनहमािममष्यु ।
प्रोच्य िि-्प्लविमप्यनि-नचत्रंिस्य िाः
ै
सह सदाऽस्मरदषेाः॥6-53॥
6-53. Delighted to discern his dear associates in the hermitage at (Badari),
Satyatirtha described time and again, the majestic grace and the exciting
(jumps) over the big rocks during his surprising swift journey and abided
there recollecting on these (animating) reminiscences.
वािरन्द्रे इव वार-ुजवोऽसौ भीमसिे इव दािव-भीमाः।
उल्ललास नगनर-पङ्गुव-शृङ्गेस व्रजि व्र्नजि-िाशि-िामा॥6-54॥
6-54. Skipping on the sublime summits of the Himalaya mountains the
meritorious Madhwacharya, the scorcher of sins of those who serve him
shone like the eminent monkey-chief crossing the sea with the speed of wind
and Bhimasena looking like a terror to the demons.
बहु-सत्त्व-गणंस नवकं स-महा-नवष-मोक्ष-महानहमवन्तमरम।्
नवषमोक्ष-महा-नहमवन्तमरि ि्गमक्ष
ै
ि पल्लु -दृगस्त-भराः॥6-55॥
6-55. The fearless Madhwacharya potent like the powerful sturdy bull, with
full-blown eyes moving ahead saw the Himalaya mountain, the refuge of
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 110

fearful animals like lions and tigers, virulent (venom-spitting) serpents along
with the beautiful birds.
(Verses 56 and 57 are to be read together as they form an antya-yugma.)
स-ुहनसि-कमल-करोप-गढूंस-ुजि-सिु ार्म
य
िन्त-भोग-शय्यम।्
नवकनसि-समुिो-घटागमच्चु ंमरिक-रत्-मर-स्थलाग्र्य-शोभम॥्6-56॥
6-56. (as applied to) Madhwacharya, the composer of the bliss-yielding
Shastra, gazing on the majestic snow-clad mountains, remembered the
supreme resplendent Lord Narayana, closely clasped by Goddess
Mahalakshmi with her lovely hands and her pleasing smile, sleeping on the
soft bed of Shesha for the benefit of the virtuous, abiding in the galaxy of gay
Gods, glistening with the glowing charm of emeralds.
पादोपान्त-िमन्महा-मनुि-गणंहेम-प्र-दीप्ताम्बरम ्
श्रीमद-्रत् कलापमग्र्य-कटक
ैनव-य
भ्रानजिंहाटक
ै
ाः।
दृष्ट्वािंधरणी-धरंस-ुवि-मालोल्लानसिंसन्दु रं
स्वािन्दाकृनिमस्मरन्मरु-नरपंुस्वािन्द-िीर्स्त
य
दा॥6-57॥
6-57. Having a multitude of eminent saints saluting his feet, dressed in
yellow garments glistening like gold, embellished with sparkling multicoloured pearl ornaments glimmering with precious golden bracelets,
beautified by the garland of lustrous flowers, bearing a body constituted of
innate knowledge and bliss.
56-57. (as applied to Himalayas) Madhwacharya, seeing the splendour of
the sublime snow-capped Himalaya mountains containing full-bloomed lotuslakes and countless flower couches for the delight of the righteous and
myriad trees with variegated flowers majestically tall, gleaming with ridges
replete with marakat gems.
With a host of eminent Sages in its groves adoring the Lord, blazing the
heavens with its golden peaks, teeming with variegated lustrous diamonds,
with radiant patches of ground lying in the midst and decked with the
charming range of flourishing forests, remembered Lord Narayana (its
sublime creator).
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 111

इनि श्रीमत्कनव-कुल-निलक-नत्रनवक्रम-पनडििाचार-यसिु श्री-िारारण-पनडििाचार-यनवरनचिे
श्री-मध्व-नवजरे महा-काव्ये-आिन्दानङ्कि षष्ठ सगाः
य
सप्तमाः सग:
य - [7-59]
अर् हम
ै
विेिटान्तरेबदरी-षडि-नवशषे-मनडििम।्
परमाश्रममाश्ररंनश्रराः सकल-ज्ाः स ददश
यनव-श्रिुम॥्7-1॥
7-1. Poornaprajna thus moving on, discerned in the northern region of the
Himalayan range the highly celebrated choice hermitage, greatly
embellished by the group of jujube trees, the abode of Lord Vedavyasa, the
heaven of Goddess Lakshmi (the source of wealth).
नहम-वष-यरनव-प्रभा-सहााः पर्ृ -ुसत्र-प्रनर्िा निजाश्ररााः।
अनप नवष्ण-ुपद-स्पृषोऽलसि उ्भरेरत्र नवनचत्र-शानििाः॥7-2॥
7-2. There (in the retreat of the Badari precincts) scintillated, the celebrated
sages specialized in separate Vedic sections, sheltered under the feet of
Lord Vishnu, reputed for their glorious sacrifices, unmindful of the snow,
showers and heat, in the thick woods of rare tall, branchy trees touching the
sky, the refuge of birds, proof against cold, rain and heat.
श्रवणामृि-गीगण
य नै
िज
ि
ाः
ै
शकु-मख्यु
ाः
ै
शभु-पनक्षनभविृय
म।्
कमलेष्टिम-नस्थरान्तराः
ै
अनप हंसाः
ै
परमर
ै
मचे क
ै
ाः॥7-3॥
7-3. There dwelt renowned saints like Shukacharya propounding the
Vaishnava Siddhanta in words sweet like nectar to the ear, learned
Brahmins deeply meditating on Lord Narayana, the beloved of Goddess
Lakshmi and birds with radiant white wings and pleasant swans sucking the
lotus, chirping honeyed sounds.
समुिो-निकरणे पनूरिंस्व-मिोऽभीष्टदमल्प-दगम
य
म।्
अपरस्पर-मत्सर-प्रजंििुवक
ै
ु
डठनमवाच्यिुालरम॥्7-4॥
7-4. Madhwacharya saw at Badari the dwelling of Lord Vedavyasa, full of
blossomed flowers with many hermits bereft of mutual jealousy satisfying the
desires of the devout, unattainable by others bereft of knowledge and
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 112

devotion, glowing like the celestial Vaikunta inhabited by the released souls
free from mutual ill-will, with their wishes fulfilled at will but inaccessible to
the ineligibles.
िनमहं प्र-नवशन्तमाश्रमं द्व्यनधक-नत्रशं ददार-लक्षणम।्
गणु-सार-नवदाः कुिहूलाद ्अव-लोक्यषर
य
इत्यनचन्तरि॥्7-5॥
7-5. The anchorites, experts in comprehending the depth of human virtues
discerning the eminent Madhwacharya endowed with all thirty-two bodily
excellences entering the hermitage out of curiosity, deliberated thus:
(a) षण्णर्त्यङ्गुलो यस्िु तयग्रोध परिमण्डलः सप्तपादश्चिुिवस्िो दान्िशांल्लक्षणैयुविः। मिाभािि
िात्पयव न्नणवय 1-122. (b) पञ्चिीर्व पञ्चसू्मः सप्तििः षडुन्निः न्ियुर्थुन्िषु गम्भीिो
द्वान्िशल्लक्षणन्स्िन्ि। लक्षण ग्रतर्थ cited in Vadiraja Swamiji in his commentary on
मिाभािि िात्पयव न्नणवय
किकािलु -िाल-सनन्नभाः कमलाक्षो नवमलेन्द-सन्मिु
ाः।
गज-राज-गनिमह
य
ा-भजु
ाः प्रनिराि क् ोऽरमपवू-य
परुूषाः॥7-6॥
7-6. Who is this unique person approaching Lord Vedavyasa statusque
(stout and tall) in stature like the golden Sal tree having long arms, charming
bright eyes like that of a lotus, a glowing face like the spotless moon and a
majestic gait in the manner of an elephant?
अनि-शान्त-वपनुिश
य
ा-कराः स्वरमके ान्त-िरो नदवा-कराः।
इनि िास्य गणुाणव
य
ाकृिाःे उपमािंभवुिषे ुलभ्ि॥े 7-7॥
7-7. He cannot be the glistening moon because he is not icy-cold, nor can he
be the dazzling sun with scorching heat: a like of him, who possesses a form
full of precious qualities, is never to be found in the whole universe.
परमाश्रनमणांगि-श्रमो ििुनचिानि नबभनि
य
धीर-धीाः।
अनप मािषु-भाव-नवग्रहो नवपलुं नवस्मरमाििोनि िाः॥7-8॥
7-8. Indeed, this indefatigable undaunted individual bearing the marks of the
excellent ascetic order, though embodied in human form appears
surprisingly strange.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 113

चिरुश्चिरुाििाः स्वरंपविो वा व्रनिरप आव्रजि।्
श्रनुि-िार्-नददृक्षराऽन्यर्ा ि िलु स्यानन्ननिलाग्र्य-लक्ष्मवाि॥्7-9॥
7-9. Can he be the wise four-faced Brahma or Lord Vayu approaching in
person, in the guise of a monk with a longing to meet their master Lord
Vedavyasa? If not so, how can he possess all the exquisite (thirty-two)
marks?
अवलोनकि-लक्षणाः स िाः
ै
इनि सनञ्चन्त्य कुिहूलाकुलाः
ै।
अनवळम्ब-गनिन्यश
य
ामरि ि्रुमाराि स् रु-पादपोत्तमम॥्7-10॥
7-10. Madhwacharya, whose human excellences were so scrutinized by the
inquisitive saints and sages hastening ahead, discerned at a distance (in the
vicinity) the choice Badari tree esteemed like the celestial trees in heaven
(Parijat, Kalpavriksha).
मसृण-त्वचमन्नुिंििंबहु-शािा-फण-सिू-रत्कम।्
भगवन्तमिन्तमनन्तकेनस्थिमीशस्य निषवेणार वा॥7-11॥
7-11. The lofty Badari tree with its soft bark, stretching its branches all
around sprouted into beaming blossoms appeared like Lord Shesha with his
sleek skin spreading his thousand lifted hoods, dazzling with diamonds in
their crests, standing in the neighbourhood to serve his master Lord
Vedavyasa.
अनिनचत्र-नवनचत्र पनत्रणंबहु-वण
ं
हनर-गो-निवारकम।्
मनुि-िन्दिनमनन्दरा-पिाःे अनर्केष्टंपििानमवानधपम॥्7-12॥
7-12. The Badari tree very dear to Lord Vedavyasa, enriched with variegated
strange leaves of varied shapes (big and small) shadowing the rays of the
sun and rendering happiness to the hermits, glistened like Garuda, the king
of birds with his blazing wings, the blessed carrier (most dear to) of Lord
Narayana consort of Goddess Lakshmi, the delight of his father Kashyapa,
impeding Indra’s thunderbolt.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 114

अमृिात्म-महा-फल-प्रदंदरवापंहनर-भनक्त-वनजि
य
ाः
ै।
नश्रि-साध-ुपरुाण-भारिंनिगमंमिूनय
मवोरु-शानििम॥्7-13॥
7-13. Madhwacharya saw that tall branched-out Badari tree, yielding
delicious fruits inaccessible to the ineligible Avaishnavas, the seat of
discourses on Bharata and Satwik Puranas that appeared like the Vedas
incarnate with their varied sections, leading its devotees to salvation
impossible to be attained by the undeserving, with the Satwik Puranas and
epics based on it.
अर् िस्य स वनेदकान्तरेस-ुनवशालेनवमलेमिो-हर।े
अवलोनकिवाििन्त-धीाः नदनव दवेानिव िापसोत्तमाि॥्7-14॥
7-14. Poornaprajna then observed the broad, pure and charming dais
(formed by the roots of the) Badari tree where squatted the distinguished
monks glistening like Gods in heaven.
अनप सप्त-िरा नवरानजिाि ग् ि-सङ्ख्याि ग्नुणिो गणुोनििाि।्
अनप मन्य-ुमदानद-वनजि
य
ाि ग् ि-भोगाि प्विाशिाि स् दा॥7-15॥
7-15. These meritorious impeccable ascetics with matted locks of hair, many
many in number who had renounced the worldly enjoyments and
vanquished the six human infirmities (like anger), while some having no
sacred thread on their bodies, subsisted on air like the serpents.
मनुि-मडिल-मध्य-वनिि
य ंनत्र-जगन्मडिल-मडििानरिम।्
इह सत्यविी-सिुंहनरंपनर-पणू -यप्रमनिाः समैक्षि॥7-16॥
7-16. Poornaprajna saw distinctly Lord Narayana seated on the platform in
the midst of the multitude of saints, embodied as Vedavyasa, the son of
Satyavati, the adornment of the three worlds.
निज-हृि-्कमलेऽनि-निमल
य ेसििंसाधुनिशामरन्ननप।
अवलोक्य पिु
ाः पिुिव
य ंिमसौ नवनस्मि इत्यनचन्तरि॥्7-17॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 115

7-17. Poornaprajna who always clearly discerned Lord Vedavyasa in the
inmost sacred sanctum of his heart looked at him again and again as
appeared the new every time, being surprised contemplated thus:
अगणय्य-गणुाणव
य ोऽमलाः स नह िारारण एष केवलम।्
नवनधिाऽिसुिृ ंपराशराि स् षुवुेसत्यविी नकलात्र रम॥्7-18॥
7-18. The impeccable Lord Vedavyasa is the very incarnation of Lord
Narayana, the repository of countless worthy attributes who being implored
by Chaturmukha Brahma manifested (on earth) as the son of Satyavati and
sage Parasara.
धवळेऽस्य मिाः-परो-निधौ सदिक्रु ोश-नगरीन्द्र-लोनळि।े
प्रकटी-भवनि स्म सन्दु री दनरिा दत्य
ै -नरपोिरी-मरी॥7-19॥
7-19. From the immaculate mind of Lord Vedavyasa, the adversary of the
Asuras moved with mercy for the meritorious, manifested the three sacred
shrutis like the lovely (goddess) Mahalakshmi, beloved of the Lord Narayana
appearing in the milky ocean (when) churned with the Mandara mountain.
इि एव परुाण-गौर-गौ स-माहाभारि-पानरजािके।
सनि जािवनि व्यजारि प्रवरंसत्रू-गणामिृ ंस्वरम॥्7-20॥
7-20. Lord Vedavyasa brought out in succession the splendid creations like
the wish-fulfilling Mahabharata, the charming eighteen Puranas and the
unexcelled sacred Brahmasutras leading to salvation like Kalpa Vriksha, the
moon, and the nectar emerging from the milky main.
निरवग्रहमवुि
य
ग्रुहं नवदधि प्ाडि
ु-सिुानद-सज्जि।े
अविावविार सनंवदांस-ुनचरारैष चचार चारु-गीाः॥7-21॥
7-21. Lord Vedavyasa speaking sweetly and charmingly strolled on the earth
for long, showering unimpeded super-abundant bliss on the (virtuous) like
the sons of Panduraja and safeguarded the supreme knowledge and its
sagacious knowers.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 116

अधिुा कनल-काल-वत्तृ रेसनविवे क्षणदाि-ुवत्तृ र।े
जि-दृग-्नवषर-त्वमत्यजद ्भगवािाश्रममावसनन्नमम॥्7-22॥
7-22. Lord Vedavyasa enriching the supreme glories of life, (abides being
invisible) to give scope for the spread of the Kali influence like the sun
receding from the sky to make room for the night.
िनददंवपरुस्य दृश्रिेदनलिन्दे ीवर-सन्दु र-द्यनुि।
परमानजि-रोग-पीठगंमम चत्ते ो-िरिानभ-िन्दिम॥्7-23॥
7-23. I am fortunate enough to directly discern the famous form of Lord
Vedavyasa, being seated on a deer-skinned pedestal, having the lustre of
the charming full-blown lotus that is a feast for my eyes and mind engaged in
meditation.
अगणय्य-गणु
ाः
ै
स-ुपनूरिंपनरपणूगनणिात्म य -सद-्गणु
ाः
ै।
इदमस्त-समस्त-दूषणंसनचदािन्द-मरंनह केवलम॥्7-24॥
7-24. His celestial form of the nature of sheer knowledge and bliss is replete
with innate, infinite auspicious attributes, every quality in turn being full and
boundless (so he is not a certain Rishi but an incarnation of Lord Narayana).
कमला-कमलासिानिलैाः नवहगाहीन्द्र-नशवन्द्रे -पवूक
य ै
ाः।
पद-पद्म-रजोऽस्य धानरिंनशरसा हन्त वहाम्यहंमहुु
ाः॥7-25॥
7-25. I bear on my pate with intense pleasure, again and again the dust of
the feet of Lord Vedavyasa, borne with great devotion on their heads by the
celestials like Goddess Mahalakshmi and Chaturmukha Brahma and Gods
like Mukhyaprana, Garuda, Shesha and Devendra and others. (He is none
else than Lord Narayana.)
प्रणमानम पद-िरंनवभोाः ध्वज-वज्राङ्कुश-पद्म-नचि-वि।्
निज-मािस-राग-पीििाद ्अरुणी-भिूनमवारुणंस्वरम॥्7-26॥
7-26. I bow to the feet of Lord Vedavyasa bearing the excellent marks of
banner, thunderbolt, goad and lotus, though ruddy by nature appearing more
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 117

red as if smeared (coloured) by the intense love in the minds of his
devotees.
ििुकेवलमवे वष्ण
ै
वंनश्रि-वन्ताः पदमात्म-रोनचषा।
िमसोऽप्यभुरस्य िाशका नवजरन्तेििरा िवंरनवम॥्7-27॥
7-27. The scintillating nails, in the feet of Lord Vedavyasa surpass in shine
the early rising Sun resorting the sky and unlike him dispels not only the
outer darkness but also the inner ignorance.
स-ुकुमार-िळाङ्गल
ु
ी-मिोाः पदरोरस्य निगढू-गल्फु रोाः।
उपमािमहो ि लभ्िेकनव-वरनै
रिरिे रं नविा॥7-28॥
7-28. Even the best of bards, to our surprise fail to find a suitable analogy to
the excellence of his feet with its fine, soft, lovely toes and concealed ankles.
उनचिांगरुुिांदधि क्र् माि श् नुच िजे नस्व स-ुवत्तृ मत्तुमम।्
भजिोऽत्र च भाजरत्यदो नवभ-ुजङ्ा-रगुळं स-रपिाम॥्7-29॥
7-29. If contemplation on the two best knees of Lord Vedavyasa, pure and
glowing, circular in shape, growing stouter in size from the feet upwards here
on earth can bestow gradually on its earnest seekers purity of mind and
heart, exemplary conduct and spiritual eminence of the Sahabhoga type,
then who can even imagine the glory and grandeur in Vaikunta, the land of
eternal bliss (The permanent abode of the released souls).
अचलासि-रोग-पनट्टका वरकक्ष्यासकृ दाप्तनमष्ट-दम।्
पनरिोऽनप हनरंस्फुरन्त्यहो अनिशंधन्यिमनेि मेमनिाः॥7-30॥
7-30. Greatly blessed is the excellent waist-band that always enjoys his
vicinity being tied round the waist to maintain the yogic posture in meditation,
of Lord Vedavyasa who yields the desired fruits to his earnest adherents
even when approached once.
रुनचरणे वरण
ै -चमण
य
ा रुनच-राज-द्यनुि-चारु-रोनचषा।
परमोरु-नििम्ब-सनङ्गिा परमाश्चर-य
िरा नवराज्यि॥े 7-31॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 118

7-31. The contact of the charming and exquisite deer-skin with the excellent
waist of Lord Vedavyasa enhanced its (deer-skin’s) delightful lustre to
astonishing brightness.
िि-ुनिम्न-स-ुिानभ-शोनभिेवनलभेवानरज-िाभ आदध।े
प्रििावनि-सन्दु रेमदृौ उदरऽेनस्मि ज् गदडि-मडिलम॥्7-32॥
7-32. Lord Vedavyasa bears the entire cosmos in his soft, slender
betwitching belly with its charming three hair-lines embellished with a
delicate, tiny, deep and lovely lotus-navel.
हृदरेकृि-सज्जिोदरेस-ुनवशालेनवमलेमिो-हर।े
उभरंवहनि त्ररी-मरंभगवाि ब्र्ह्म-स-ुसत्रूमत्तुमम॥्7-33॥
7-33. Vedavyasa the doyen of the Vashista dynasty bears the exquisite
Brahmasutras that settle the meaning of the three Vedas in his heart and the
sacred thread (containing the three strings) on the heart (body) and blesses
the upright with prosperity.
असमऽेिनधकेस-ुसानधिेनिज-िािेरनव-रानश-दीनधनि।
प्रददौ नत्र-जगज्जर-ध्वजंनवनधरिे द-्गळ-सनङ्ग भषूणम॥्7-34॥
7-34. Chaturmukha Brahma gave Lord Vedavyasa the koustubha gem
having the brilliance of a cluster of Suns to adorn his neck for having
established (in the celestial assembly) Lord Narayana his dad, as the
supreme, one without a second (neither equal nor superior to him) as a mark
of his victory in the three Worlds.
(a) नान्स्ि नािायण समां न भूिां न भन्र्ष्यन्ि एिेन सत्यर्ाक्येन सर्ावर्थावन् साधयाम्यिम्। -
Mahabharata (b) सत्यां सत्यां पुनः सत्यां उद्धृत्य भुजमुच्यिे र्ेदशािाि् पिां नान्स्ि न दैर्ां
के शर्ात्पिम्॥ - Mahabharata
अनर-वानरज-लक्षणोल्लसि-्स-ुकुमारारुण-पानण-पद्मरोाः।
पर्ृ -ुपीवर-वृत्त-हस्तरोाः उपमांिव
ै
लभामहेऽिरोाः॥7-35॥
7-35. The stout, lovely, long, circular arms of Lord Vedavyasa shining with
the marks of discus and conch find no similitude in the whole world.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 119

भजिांवर-िक
य-मर्द्ुरा द्यनि हस्ताग्रमबोधमीनशिाः
ु।
अनध-जािुसमनपि
य ंपरंकृि-भरूो-भर-भङ्ग-मङ्गळम॥्7-36॥
7-36. The tip of (the fingers of) the right hand of Lord Vedavyasa betokening
the best seal of knowledge destroys the ignorance of its devotees and the
extremity of his left hand resting on the knee showing the sign of
fearlessness, dispels the dire dread of samsara and bestows the bliss of
beatitude.
सििंगळिा स्विाः श्रनुि-नत्रिरिेवे निकाममनङ्किाः।
स-ुनविनम्बि-कम्बरुीक्ष्यिेवर-रिे ा-त्ररवाि ग् रुोगळ
य
ाः॥7-37॥
7-37. The neck of the preceptor Lord Vedavyasa, decorated with three lines
as if marked by the three Vedas that always gush out of his mouth, looks
luminous like conch with its three folds.
सकलास्त-कलङ्क-कानळम-स्फुरनदन्द-प्रकरोरु-नवभ्रमम।्
अधरी-कुरुिेस्व-शोभरा वदिंदवे-नशिा-मणीनरदम॥्7-38॥
7-38. The countenance of Lord Vedavyasa, the crest of the deities with its
innate effulgence diminishes the splendour of a cluster of shining moons
endued with sixteen digits without stains.
अरुणाश्म-दलान्तरोल्लसि-्िव-मक्तु ावनलमस्य लज्जरिे ।्
हसिाः नसि-दन्त-सन्तनिाः परम-श्रीररुणोष्ठ-रोनचषाः॥7-39॥
7-39. The row of teeth, graced with the exquisite lustre of Lord Vedavyasa’s
gentle smile glistening in the midst of his rosy lips puts to blush the line of
gems glittering in the midst of ruby-pieces.
निज-वृन्द-कृिंकुिहूलाद ्अि-ुरोगाध-ुसहस्रमत्तुमम।्
इरमके -पदेसरस्विी श्रनुि-भिाः
य
ुपनरपरूरत्यहो॥7-40॥
7-40. Indeed, it is really remarkable that Vedavyasa, the Lord of Vedas could
process his tongue (use words) to reply at one stroke the thousand pick
queries hurled by the group of learned Brahmins with great curiosity
(eagerness) like a river filling thousands of wells simultaneously.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 120

सिस्रार्थावनुषीनेश य्यपयपयेनेन पृच्ःिः। सिस्रोतरदिदानेन युगपत्ययविोषयि्।
जलजारि-लोचिस्य मांअवलोकोऽरमपुत्ये लाळरि।्
कुरुिेपनररभ् पनूरिंभवुिािन्द-कर-नस्मिानन्विाः॥7-41॥
7-41. Lord Vedavyasa, with his wide winning eyes (like the lotus) wedded to
his pleasant smile yielding delight to the world, approaches me, coaxing,
embracing and fructifying (making me blessed).
उप-कणम
य
मष्यु भानसिा िळु सी मन्त्ररिीव लानळिा।
मम िार् पदंि मत्सराि ज् लजाद्यानि हररे नुरत्यलम॥्7-42॥
7-42. The Tulasi leaf glistening in the ear of this Lord (Vedavyasa) appears
as if reverently soliciting him in secrecy: ‘Oh Lord! Let not my place be
usurped out of envy by the lotus and other flowers’ – (This is to instruct his
followers to keep a Tulasi Leaf in their ear and prove its superiority to
flowers).
नवभवानभ-भवोद्भवानदकं भवुिािांभवुि-प्रभोभ्रवु
य ोाः।
अिरोरनप दभ्र-नवभ्रमाि स् -भवााोज-भवात्मिांभविे॥्7-43॥
7-43. The slight movement of the sportive eyebrows of this Lord Vedavyasa,
the master of the universe, govern the creative glory and ruin of the cosmos
including the dignitaries like Brahmaji, Shankara and others.
नत्र-जगि-्निलकानळकान्तरेनिलकोऽरंपर-भागमाप्तवाि।्
हनर-िील-नगरीन्द्र-मस्तक-स्फुट-शोणोपल-पनि-सनन्नभाः॥7-44॥
7-44. This red round mark decorating (occupying the Centre) the prime place
on the brow of the supreme Lord Vedavyasa, the adornment of the universe,
resembles in lustre the row of rubies scintillating on the crest of the shining
sapphire mountain.
िवमम्ब-ुधरं नविम्बरद ्वर-नवद्यदु-्वलरंजगद-्गरुोाः।
अवलोक्य कृिार्ि
य
ामगांस-जटा-मडिल-मडििंवपाः
ु॥7-45॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 121

7-45. Blessed am I who have seen this supreme auspicious, blue body of
Lord Vedavyasa, the preceptor of the world adorned with matted lock that
resembles the lightening in the blue water-bearing cloud.
ि रमाऽनप पदाङ्गल
ु
ी-लसि-्िि-ध-ूराजदिन्त-सद-्गणुाि।्
गणरदे ्गणरन्त्यिारिंपरमाि क् ोऽस्य परो गणुाि व्दिे ॥्7-46॥
7-46. Who else can recount the countless attributes of the supreme Lord
when even Goddess Mahalakshmi his dear consort, though ceaselessly
counting the excellent qualities in the flashing nails of the finger of his foot,
cannot account for them?
(1) न्र्ष्णोनुव कां र्ीयावन्ण प्रर्ोचम् (A) य पार्थर्थर्ान्न न्र्ममे िजाांन्स। Rk Samhita (B) न्र्ष्णोनुव
र्ीयावन्ण किमोऽिविीि। यः पार्थर्थर्ातयन्प कन्र्र्थर्ममे िजाांन्स। Bhagawata (2) न िे न्र्ष्णोः
जायमानो न जािो देर् मन्िम्न पिमतिमपाप। Rk Samhita
ि कुिहूनलिा कुिहूलं ििमुिेामवलोक्य सद-्गरुोाः।
स-िवावरणाडि-दनशि
य ो गहृ-बद्ध्यु ामम निष्कुिहूलम॥्7-47॥
7-47. It is not startling that the strange Form of this great preceptor Lord
Vedavyasa appearing always afresh, strikes a sense of surprise in me who
without being stunned sees the entire cosmos, constituted of the nine
coverings like water, fire, sky, abode and air.
इनि नचन्तरिा महा-नधरा पदवीं बाह्य-गिामिीरषुा।
समिो-िरिाः
ै
परुा गिाः िि आपेवपषुाऽनप वदे-राट॥् 7-48॥
7-48. Poornaprajna contemplating thus, envisioning the form of the Lord of
the Vedas from afar in his pure mind, now bodily approached him.
गरुु-भनक्त-भराििाकृ निाः नवरचय्याञ्जनल-बधमञ्जसा।
क्षणमा-मकुुळी-कृिक्षे णाः स गरुुं केवलमभ्वन्दि॥7-49॥
7-49. This disciple of Lord Vedavyasa, bent with the burden of devout
devotion for his preceptor, with folded hands and eyes half-closed in
adoration could only extol him being so overwhelmed with exhilaration.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 122

नविराभरणिे भनूषिाः स्फुटमष्टाङ्ग-नवनशष्ट-चनेष्टिाः।
भगवि-्िम-पाद-पङ्कजेभगवाि स् प्र-णिाम भाग्रवाि॥्7-50॥
7-50. Embellished with humility, the blessed Madhwacharya duly prostrated
(a noble gesture) before the worshipful Lord Vedavyasa and paid his
obeisance (to the lotus-feet of) his preceptor.
स निरीक्ष्य पराशरात्म-जाः प्रणिंप्रष्ठेमशषे-सद-्गणु
ाः
ै।
कररोरग
य
ुळेि वल्गिुा िमदुस्थापरदाश-ुपानििा॥7-51॥
7-51. Lord Vedavyasa, son of sage Parashara delighted to see his disciple
full of propitious qualities bowing down in all veneration instantly raised him
up with both of his charming stretched hands (warmly welcomed him).
अनमि-प्रमनि-ंश्रिुीश्वराः पनररभे ेपनरगह्यृ िंर्द्ु
िम।्
प्रणरामृि-पणू -यमािसाः नस्मि-वक्त्राः पनरपल्लु -लोचिाः॥7-52॥
7-52. Vedavyasa the Lord of the Vedas, with his mind filled with the nectar of
affection, with his pleasant smile and full-blown eyes, holding close
Sarvajnacharya instantly embraced him.
रमजाम्यदुवास ऊनजि
य ो रनद जाम्बिूद-वानर सव्रं जिे ।्
किक-द्यनुि-मध्व-सङ्गवाि उ् पमीरिे स ििे िील-भााः॥7-53॥
7-53. Lord Vedavyasa lustrous blue, deeply embracing the golden-hued
Madhwacharya appeared as if the beaming flow of the blue waters of the
Yamuna joined the golden river.
रनद राज-नवभषूणर
ै
ि
य
ुौ निज-वरान्व
य
रजानवमौ हरी।
िृप-गोत्र-भवुोाः परुाऽऽत्मिोाः स्फुट-िल्यु ावपु-गढूरोनमर्
य
ाः॥7-54॥
7-54. The close clasp of Lord Vedavyasa and Poornaprajna born in the clan
of the eminent Brahmins, could have resembled the mutual fond hug of Lord
Krishna and Bhimasena of imperial descent in case Lord Hari (Vedavyasa)
and Mukhyaprana (Poornaprajna) had been robed in royal raiments and
regal ornaments.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 123

इदमाप शकु ोऽनप लाळिंि समग्रंजगिांनपिाः
ुनपिाः
ु।
अलनभष्ट रदषे धन्य इ-त्यनि-कौिहूलमानप िापसाः
ै॥7-55॥
7-55. The Sages were greatly startled to see the blessed Acharya secure
this celebrated honour (of a loving embrace of the Sahabhoga type) which
even Shukacharya could not earn from his father (Lord Vedavyasa), the
creator of the cosmos.
अमष्यु नशष्या नविरिे िस्म
ै
गरुोरनभप्रार-नवदो नवदग्धााः।
िदाऽि-ुरपंददरासिंिेचिमुि
य
ु ारवे मकुुन्द-दासााः॥7-56॥
7-56. The sagacious students understanding the motive of their master Lord
Vedavyasa, offered with modesty a suitable seat, like the servants of the
Supreme providing a proper place to Chaturmukha Brahma.
आस्यिानमत्यदुीरोपनवष्टेसत्यवत्यााः सिुेसत्य-वानच।
िन्दरि म् न्द-हासावलोक
ै
ाः िाि म् िुीन्द्रानिहोपानवशि स् ाः॥7-57॥
7-57. Asking him to be seated, Lord Vedavyasa son of Satyavati, the votary
of truth adorned the dais and Madhwacharya delighting the distinguished
saints by his pleasant look and gentle smile, occupied his place.
अवगम्य िंमनुि-गणा वनरष्ठिो नवनधवद ्व्यधनुवनय
ध-नवदोऽस्य माििाम।्
अनप सङ्कर्ााः श्रनुि-सिु ााः कवीन्द्ररोाः अिरोनिश
य
म्य परमांमदुंरराः
ु॥7-58॥
7-58. Having well-known the excellence of Madhwacharya (as Jivottama)
from their celebrated sire, the assemblage of Sages paid due deference
(according to the prescribed code of conduct) and gained immense glee in
listening to the delightful talk of Lord Vedavyasa and Madhwacharya,
pleasing to the ears.
सज्ज्ञािाराऽऽिन्द-नवज्ाि-मिूी प्राप्तौ पथ्वृ ीमाश्रमेित्र िावि।्
जाज्वल्यिेनवष्ण-ुवारूस्म दवेौ वदेवारासािन्द-िीर्ानभधािौ य ॥59॥
7-59. The great gods Lord Narayana and Mukhyaprana, the embodiments of
supreme lore and bliss, who descended on earth as Lord Vedavyasa and
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 124

Anandatirtha to bless the virtuous with divine knowledge, greatly glazed in
the glowing hermitage at Badari.
इनि श्रीमत्कनव-कुल-निलक-नत्रनवक्रम-पनडििाचार-यसिु श्री-िारारण-पनडििाचार-यनवरनचिे
श्री-मध्व-नवजरे महा-काव्ये-आिन्दानङ्किे सप्तमाः सगाः
य
अष्टमाः सग:
य- [8-54]
(This canto is a good summary of Bhagawata. It is the core of Sumadhwa
Vijaya wherein Madhwacharya receives the command to compose
Brahmasutra Bhashya.)
प्रनिभा-प्रभा-प्रमिु -सद-्गणुनै
िज
य
ाः
ै
अनि नवस्मरंनिरनमिांमिो िरि।्
परुु-धीाः कदानचदर् वदे-िारकं नव-जिेशिरु
ै
पससाद िंवि॥े 8-1॥
8-1. After meeting Lord Vedavyasa, the master of the Vedas, Poornaprajna
startling the sages with his eminent virtues like genius and splendour, once
slowly approached Him in seclusion in the wood-land for (tatwajnana) higher
knowledge.
स-ुनवशषे-शषेवदशषे-वनणि
य -प्रनिबोद्धर
ु
स्य ििुनशष्यिोनचिा।
गरुु-मािसस्य गरुुिाऽनप सि-्पिाःे इनि सोपसनत्तरमरर
ै
मान्यि॥8-2॥
8-2. This access of the lofty-minded Poornaprajna, the deserving student, to
his befitting teacher Lord Vedavyasa the master of Vedas, to receive from
him the occult tenets (not given to the lower Gods like Rudra and others)
was highly applauded by the Gods.
परुएव पनूरिमपरूरि प्िु
ाः ििुकृष्ण एष परमार्-य
सङ्ख्यरा।
भगवन्मिाः परुनममाऽरिंपरुा निज-धाम िांच जगहृेिदद्भि
ु
म॥्8-3॥
8-3. It is really astonishing that the broad mind of Poornaprajna, the abode of
Lord Vedavyasa already replete with wisdom and the city of Dwaraka
abounding in wealth, were commodious enough to contain still greater
knowledge (Tatwajnana) and greater riches at the hands of Vasishta-Krishna
(lord Vedavyasa) and Yadava Krishna respectively.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 125

इनिहास-सन्दु र-परुाण-सत्रू-सि-्नप्रर-पिरात्र-निज-भाव-सरं िुम।्
अशृणोदिन्त-हृदिन्त-िोऽनचराि प्रमार्म
य
प्यगनणिागमावलेाः॥8-4॥
8-4. Sarvajnacharya heard from Lord Ananta (Vedavyasa the main import of
the innumerable heap of Vedas during a short interval, along with the real
purport of the epics like Mahabharata, the significant Satwik Puranas like
Bhagawata and Brahmasutras and Pancharatra, dear to the gentle-natured.
It is no surprise that Sarvottama (Vedavyasa) passed on knowledge
enormous to Jivottama (Madhwacharya) in no time; hence a well-deserved
preceptor for an equally well-deserving pupil.)
ऋज-ुपङ्गुवस्य पनर-जाििाः स्वरंसकलं िदप्यलमिन्त-जन्मस।ु
स्व-कृिोवि
य
ग्रुह-बलादमष्यु िांनवनशशषे शषे-शरिाः पिुनधर
य
म॥्8-5॥
8-5. Lord Vedavyasa further enriched the innate wisdom of Poornaprajna,
ever present in him in his countless births, by his profuse grace. He
(Madhwacharya) is the foremost of the Ruju class by virtue of his being the
reigning Lord Vayu.
अर् बादरारण-सहार-सम्पदा प्रररौ प्रणन्तमुनमिान्तरो रिु
ाः।
अनप िानदरारण-पदोनदिंहराःे वपरुन्तरंलनसिमाश्रमान्तर॥े 8-6॥
8-6. After listening to the Sastras, Madhwacharya, enlivened in the company
of Lord Vedavyasa his master, moved on to offer his homage to Lord
Narayana, another incarnation of the supreme glistening in another
hermitage, in the same region (Badari).
िमपश्रदाश्रम-वरेप्रभिू-धीाः ज्वलिंज्वलन्तनमव धमू-वनजि
य
म।्
वर-वल्कलाकनलि-मौनञ्ज-मिे लं नवलसज्जटा-वलरमानद-परुूषम॥्8-7॥
8-7. In this (exquisite) hermitage, Poornaprajna saw Lord Narayana, the
supreme person clad in charming bark (garments), decked with his girdle of
mounja grass and shining matted lock, flashing like fire without fumes (not
depending on worldly objects).
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 126

अनिदजर
य ोनन्द्रर-जरानद-रनपणा िपसा वसन्तनमव सन्तिम व्ि।े
निज-रप-भिू-निरपक्षे -निमल
य -प्रचरुात्म-सौख्य-रिमप्यिारिम॥्8-8॥
8-8. (Madhwacharya saw Lord Narayana) residing in the woods, as if
practicing penance to subdue the stubborn senses, with a total unconcern
for earthly attainments and ever-enjoying his abounding, immaculate,
eternal, innate bliss (to delude the demons and to tutor the virtues).
िरि-िरिे िनलि-प्रभा-मषुा पनर-पल्लु िा-नवलनसििे नवस्मराि।्
िमवक्ष्ये धम-य
जमधम-य
दल
य
भंमिसनेि भनूरिर-मािसोऽस्मरि॥्8-9॥
8-9. Madhwacharya, astounded to discern Lord Narayana, with his charming
full-blown eyes surpassing in lustre the beauty of the lotus, never attainable
by the sinful, manifesting on earth as the son of God Yama, recollected thus:
जगिांचिदुश
य -िरंचिमुि
य
ु -प्रमिु र
ै
ि
य
ुंप्रळरमा-नििार राः।
सममल्लु सि क् मलरव
ै
केवलं परमाः स एष नह परुाण-परुूषाः॥8-10॥
8-10. (This progeny of Yamaraja) is none other than the supreme, primeval
Lord Narayana who ever shines with Goddess Lakshmi and brings about the
deluge of the cosmos, bearing the fourteen worlds constituted of Brahma
and other Gods.
नत्रगणुाकृनि-प्रकृ नि-िो गरुुं ििाः नत्रनवधामहंकृनिममत्य-य
िान्यिाः।
अनप भिू-पञ्चकनमिोऽडि-मडिलं भगवािसानवह जगनन्त चासजृ ि॥्8-11॥
8-11. Lord Narayana, the eightfold dispenser of the universe created MahatTatwa from Primordial Matter constituted of (the qualities) Satwa, Rajas and
Tamas and from Mahatatwa the three-fold Ahankara-tatwa (Vaikarika,
Taijasa and Tamasa) and from them, the celestial bodies, the indriyas and
the five elements of earth, water, fire, air and sky and with them the cosmic
egg containing the fourteen worlds.
नवनध-वार-ुवीन्द्र-नशव-कौनशकेशकाि ्अमरामरािगु-िरासरुानदकाि।्
सृजनि प्र-पालरनि हनन्त सन्तिं स्व-गनिंप्र-रापरनि चैष लीलरा॥8-12॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 127

8-12. Lord Narayana always creates, sustains and destroys the universe
with sport, inclusive of all the Gods beginning with Brahma, Vayu, Garuda,
Rudra, Indra, Gandharwas and other followers of Gods, human beings and
demons and leads them to their destined ends (according to their inherent
capabilities).
अगणय्य-सद-्गणु-गणो नवदूषणाः स्व-वशानिलोऽप्यिपुचारिाः स्वरम।्
स्मनृि-कीिि
य -प्रणनिनभनवम
य
क्तु रेस्व-जिस्य रात्यरमिके -रपिाम॥्8-13॥
8-13. Lord Narayana, teeming with countless virtuous qualities, untouched of
blemishes, with the entire universe under his dominion, assumes varied
suitable forms to enable to devotees to secure salvation through recollection,
deep thought and salutation to those embodiments.
चिरुाििार चिरु
ाः पराुऽऽगमाि प्र्ददावसावनिनमषश्वे राः प्रभाः
ु।
नवनिहत्य नह श्रनुि-मषुंपरुाििंवपषुोद्धिंहर-मिु िे सनर्द्पमु॥्8-14॥
8-14. In days of yore, this mighty Lord Narayana manifesting as the king-fish
slayed the arrogant ancient horse-faced devil, the foe of the virtuous who
had stolen the four Vedas and restored them to Chaturmukha-Brahma;
(Matsyavatara). This lord of Gods in the form man-horse slaughtered the
devil Madhu, the primordial enemy of the gentle and gave back the Vedas
pilfered by him to Chaturmukha-Brahma. (Hayagriva avatara).
(Embodied in the fish-form and in the horse-form Lord Narayana killed the
fiends Hayagriva and Madhu respectively, and restored the Vedas filched by
them to Chaturmukha-Brahma).
अमरन्द्रे -वैनर-भजु -दडि-मडिल-प्रनिकष-य
पष्कु र-पिद-्धरोद्धृनिाः।
नवदधेवराहवपषुाऽमिुोनमम
य
ि-्सृनि-नसधुकच्छपिराऽऽप्त-रनक्षणा॥8-15॥
8-15. (Kurma-Varaha) This same eminent Lord, the succour of the
suppliants hearkening to the entreaty of the Gods uplifted the Mandara
Mountain churned by thousands of arms of deities and demons, dipping in
the mounting waves of the deep, manifesting himself in the form of a
tortoise.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 128

This very eminent Lord, the releaser of the dedicated devotees from the sea
of Samsara subject to the six blemishes (waves) incarnating in the boardshape destroyed the demon Hiranyaksha, the eternal enemy of the divines
and picked up Mother earth, mercilessly dragged by his (Hiranyaksha’s)
mighty arms and immersed in the ocean.
(Lord Narayana protected the Mandara-mountain and Mother-Earth, lifting
them from the Milky-ocean and the sea with his Kurma and Varaha
manifestations respectively.)
िरनसहं एष नवददार दारुणंप्रनिघोदरिेिर-चक्र-िजे सा।
स्व-नरपंुक्षणिे सरसाः स्फुरि-्ििंुपर्ृ -ुसत्वनमष्ट-जि-भीनि-भञ्जिाः॥8-16॥
8-16. (Narayana and Tapasa) Lord Narayana, to remove the dread of his
dear devotees rent his relentless gigantic enemy (Hiranyakashyapu) in
righteous resentment with his (discus-like) flaming nails, illuming his
manifested valorous Man-Lion form and protected Prahlada.
Lord Narayana, the highest Purusha, who frees his followers from fright in
his incarnation as Tapasa, lacerated the alarming whale pulling it out from
the lake with his pointed luminous discus and shielding the king of the
elephants (Gajendra).
अनप वामिो लनळि-बाल्यवािरंप्रनिभा-बलेि कृि-दैत्य-कौिकु
ाः।
उपधरेधाः-कृ ि-बलीन्द्र-शात्रवाः स्व-जिार केवलमदाि प्रंपदम॥्8-17॥
8-17. (Vamana and Buddha) Lord Narayana, incarnating as the beautiful
dwarf, a lovely lad, arousing the curiosity of the demons duped king Bali, the
enemy of God Indra (with the splendour of his intellect) by treading him
down to the underworld (Sutala) under the pretext of demanding three paces
of earth and restored the kingdom of heaven to the God of heavens (Indra).
Lord Narayana manifesting his celestial baby-form as Buddha with a
charming child-hood, inciting the inquisitiveness of the evil tempered men by
the grandeur of his imagination, and leading them astray from their righteous
path to dark hell and blessed the Gods and his adherents with beatitude.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 129

कर्रन्त्यमंुपरशभुासमािगो-हि-मत्य-य
दवे-िमसंमहुुमहु
य
ु
ाः।
जगिांनहिंहनरनमवापरंहनरंगरुु-शनक्त-िापस-वरान्वरोद-्भवम॥्8-18॥
8-18. (Parashurama and Vedavyasa) Lord Narayana manifesting in his
Parashurama-form, in the race of Jamadagni the devout ascetic as his son,
reckoned by the wise as another blazing Sun, destroyed the dreadful
Kshatriyas again and again (21 times) by the brilliance of his axe.
Lord Narayana incarnating as the benefactor of the world as Lord
Vedavyasa in the clan of the eminent sage Shakti, as his grandson, styled
by the sapient as the second illustrious sun, demolished the (darkness of the
ignorance of the Gods and human beings with the excellence of his
auspicious excelling words.
(Verses 19 to 34, both inclusive, refer to the incarnations of Lord Rama and
Lord Krishna.)
करुणाकराः सवसदुवे-मोद-दो भगवाि प्रुा[ऽ]नहम-करान्वरऽेभवि।्
नजिवाि न्दशो दशरर्ोऽग्र्य-सम्पदो जिको बभवू भनुव रस्य वनै
रहा॥8-19॥
8-19. The revered merciful Lord in days of yore (in Treta-age) manifested on
the earth in the solar dynasty as Sri Ramachandra delighting the Gods
including the Vasus and the eminent Sages with Dasharatha as his father
who had vanquished the rulers in all the ten quarters replete with riches and
defeated the formidable foes.
The compassionate revered Lord in the distant Dwapara Age incarnating in
the lunar dynasty as Sri Krishna, enraptured Vasudeva who with his divine
chariot conquered the guardians of the ten directions and destroyed his
mighty enemies.
भजुगश्वे रोऽनप भवुिश्वे र-नप्रराः समजन्यर्ानर-दर-जन्म भव्यु भिू।्
िममष्यु कानन्त-नवनजिन्दे मग्रजंरमणीरमाहुनरह राम-िामकम॥्8-20॥
8-20. The Lord of Serpents, (God Shesha) dear to the Lord of the worlds
(Narayana) manifested on earth as Lakshmana; then were born Bharata and
Shatrugna who were Kama and Aniruddha, the presiding deities of discus
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 130

and conch having Lord Ramachandra as their eldest brother who excelled in
beauty the lustre of the moon.
The sovereign of snakes, (Shesha) dear to the supreme, the first to descend
on earth was named as Balarama: then incarnated his younger brother the
Lord of the universe, the revered Sri Krishna who struck terror in the minds
of the demons and surpassed in loveliness the splendour of the moon: then
were born the presiding deities of conch and discus as Kama and
Aniruddha.
जिकेि सोऽर् नवरहासनहष्णिुा महुुरीनक्षिो विमिीरि प्रभाः
ु।
चनकििे दष्ट-जििस्तपनस्विा िि आसरुीं निनशचरीं जघाि साः॥8-21॥
8-21. The mighty Lord Sri Rama who was gazed on by his father (King
Dasharatha) who was unable to brook his severance and who was
requisitioned by sage Vishwamitra to guard his sacrifice halted from fell
fiends like Mareecha, slayed the she-demon Tataka.
The potent Lord Sri Krishna seeing his devout father Vasudeva scared by
the savage Satans, moved to Brihadwana (the Thick woods) where he
sucked the evil sorceress Putana to death.
मनुि-सप्त-िन्त-ुकृ ि-वैर-बधिंकट
ु-केश्रनरष्ट-पि-मख्यु -दजि
य
म।्
क्षपरन्तमद्युि-सबुाहुमाहवेिमर्ाभ्िन्ददमरानद-सद-्गणाः॥8-22॥
8-22. The deities and the righteous greatly complimented Lord Sri Rama
who slaughtered Subhahu, the spurner of the sacrifices of the sages, bent
on battle, heading the heinous with their cutting hair who were the rootcause of evil.
The celestials and the assembly of the Vishnu exulted in immense glory
when Lord Krishna killed in combat the chief notorious devils named Keshi
and Arishta with matted hair who confronted him, ever inclined to embarrass
the lineage of saints.
सविेनवकस्वर-गणु-स्वर-निजेस्फुरिेचरि स् कल-गोकुल-नप्रराः।
इि-काम िापसरसार्द्
य
धी-नगराः प्रनिलाळरन्नरमिष
ै
सन्दु रीाः॥8-23॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 131

8-23. Lord Sri Rama, glorified by the sacred scriptures, roaming round
safeguarding the glowing sacrifice performed by sage Vishwamitra and other
meritorious saints with sonorous Vedic sounds, felicitated by the winning
words of wish-fulfilled hermits, rejoiced.
Lord Sri Krishna, the darling of the residents of Gokula, wandering in the
witching woods harkening to the sweet harmony of the birds, gladdening the
graceful Gopis afflicted by the arrows of love shining with their sweet songs,
delighted.
सहजानन्विाः सकल-नमत्र-सरं िुो मधरुांपरुीं जिक-वल्लभांगिाः।
प्र-नवशनन्नमांस जगदके -सन्दु रो-िर-िारद
य
ुार-िरिोत्सवोऽभवि॥्8-24॥
8-24. Lord Sri Rama, the exemplar of beauty, escorted by his younger
brother Lakshmana along with sage Vishwamitra entering the charming city
of Mithila dear to king Janaka feasted the eager eyes of its citizens.
Lord Sri Krishna, beauty incarnate, in company with his elder brother
Balarama and his friend-cowherds, entering the Mathura town cherished by
his father Vasudeva was an object of festivity to its curious inhabitants.
अर् िनडििश्वे र-धिाः
ुस लीलरा क्षनपिोग्रसिे-िृप-पत्रु-पौरुषाः।
समपुास्य नवप्र-गरुुमब्ज-भ-ूगरुु
ाः स्व-जिािमोदरदमरे-िजे सा॥8-25॥
8-25. Afterwards, Lord Sri Rama, the father of the four-faced Brahma
delighted his devotees with his mighty majesty and pleased his learned
preceptor Vishwamitra by effortlessly breaking the bow of Rudra and
punishing the proud potentates heading a powerful army.
Then Lord Sri Krishna smashed the bow of God Shiva, smothered the
swollen sovereign Kamsa, the son of King Ugrasena and gratified his wise
Guru Sandeepani by his sincere service and his father Vasudeva by his
lustrous valour in vanquishing the invincible Jarasandha and other felons.
कमलामरंकमल-पत्र-लोचिांभवुमागिांिपृ-सिुांगहृ ीिवाि।्
निज-लीलरा नवनजि-राज-शात्रवो मदुमापदाप्य परुमनब्ध-दगम
य
म॥्8-26॥
8-26. Lord Sri Rama married Goddess Mahalakshmi who had descended on
the earth as Sita, the daughter of King Janaka with her lovely broad (lotus-
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 132

like eyes) and on his way showing as if overcoming Lord Parashurama (in
sport), the dread enemy of the depraved Kshatriyas and reached his capital
Ayodhya impregnable like the sea and gained great glory (delight).
Lord Sri Krishna wedded the Goddess Mahalakshmi who manifested on the
land as Rukmini, the offspring of King Bhishmaka and sportively vanquished
the rival monarchs and entered the celestial city of Dwaraka defended by the
deep (sea) with great delectation.
स जगाम मािृ-जि-िष्टुरेनकल त्वनरिो[ऽ]विंनवदधदीनििंसिाम।्
सह भारर
य
ाऽनप शभुरा महा-जर-ध्वज-लक्ष्मणाग्र्य-सहृुदा नविा[ऽ]मदुा॥8-27
8-27. Lord Sri Rama, to please his youngest mother Kaikeyi speedily retired
to the forest with his charming consort (Sita) and his affectionate brother
(Lakshmana), his auspicious symbol of victory.
Lord Sri Krishna, satisfying the longings of the noble to content his mother
Aditi, moved with pleasure with his propitious partner (wife) Satyabhama and
his triumphant carrier Garuda, his emblem of conquest.
समिीि-पवि
य -परुोग-दगम
य
ाः िर-दूषणानद-स-ुजि-निषो बहूि।्
स निहत्य नवश्व-भर-दंस-ुदस्सहं िरकं महा-िम उिािरि क्र् माि॥्8-28॥
8-28. Lord Sri Rama having traversed many mountains like Chitrakuta and
the intractable regions and destroyed the multitude of adversaries of the
virtuous like Khara and Dushana led them to their destined dreadful,
intolerable, eternal hell (which horripilates those who even hear of it).
Lord Sri Krishna mounting the hills and crossing many citadels hard to
manage, annihilated the band of heinous enemies of the noble like Mura and
Narakasura, full of malice for Lord Vishnu and unpardonable spite for his
followers and condemned them to an insufferable, horrid Inferno (hell).
रुनचराश्रमानजरनचिाग्र्य-िजे सा नप्रररा नप्ररो भवुि-मान्यरा समम।्
भशृ माकुली-कृ ि-मद-प्रमादवि-्सरु-पानरजाि-हृदवाप धाम साः॥8-29॥
8-29. Lord Sri Rama, darling of the people, putting in dire distress the host of
intensely inebriated and often erring enemies of Devendra dazzled with his
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 133

effulgent dear wife Sita worshipped by the world, in the veranda of his
hermitage at Panchavati, lighted up by their lustre.
Lord Sri Krishna, picking the Parijata tree belonging to the Gods intoxicated
with their prosperity oblivious of the identity of Krishna with Lord Narayana,
returned to his capital Dwaraka along with his consort Satyabhama, revered
in the universe who manifested her great might in the impressive, illustrious
fight with Gods with extreme ease.
हनरिामधीश-िर-दवे-मडिलं दश-कं नवनजत्य पर-भीषणंमहुु
ाः।
स्फुनरिानमह नप्ररिमांनिज-नश्ररंभगवािपुक्ष
ै
ि हरन्तमनप्ररम॥्8-30॥
8-30. The revered Lord Ramachandra ignored the disliked ten-faced
Ravana, dreadful to the circle of kings and the presiding deities of the ten
directions, defeated many times who carried away by force Sita-form shining
in the hermitage, his (Sri Rama’s) real wealth (Goddess Mahalakshmi).
The illustrious Sri Krishna slighted the spurned Duryodhana who seized the
righteous wealth of the winsome Pandavas (in the game of dice at
Hastinapura) garnered by conquest of the rich rulers of the ten quarters.
अनभिनन्दिाः पवि-िन्दिानदनभाः स कदानचनदन्द्र-सिु-वधक
य ो गवा।
निज-राज्यमात्म-दनरिार दत्तवाि ह्नर-सिूवेहि-नवपक्षमत्तुमम॥्8-31॥
8-31. Lord Sri Rama being saluted by the son of Vayu (Hanuman) and other
monkey-chiefs (at the Rishyamuka mountain) once, slayed Wali the son of
Indra with a shaft and bestowed on his dear devotee Sugriva the son of the
Sun, the Kingdom of Kishkinda free from foes.
Lord Sri Krishna saluted by Bhimasena the progeny of Vayu and other
Pandavas, once (during the war) imparted instructions with wise words
(Bhagwadgita) to Arjuna and blessed dear Yudhistira, the son of
Yamadharma with his domain rid of rivals.
मदुमाप्य ित्र दनरिोरु-वात्तर
य
ा मध-ुहा मरुि-्सिु-मिु -प्रवृत्तरा।
हनर-निग्म-चक्र-लनसिोऽनब्ध-मध्य-गंप्रररौ स पड
ुरजि-सनेविंपरुम॥्8-32॥
8-32. Lord Sri Rama, the slayer of the demon Madhu exulting in the news
emitted through the mouth of Anjaneya (son of Vayu) of his success in the
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 134

search of Sita, embellished with the forces of fiery monkeys, reached Lanka
the capital of the demons located in the midst of the deep.
Lord Sri Krishna decked with the scorching resplendent discus, hearkening
to the precious tidings (in Upaplavya) delivered by Bhimasena of the murder
of the callous Kichaka and the other varies exploits of the Pandavas (during
their stay-incognito) to his delight, arrived at the celestial city of Dwaraka
hallowed by the meritorious.
पर्ृ -ुकुा-कण-य
गज-राजमद्धुिंस-सहो[ऽ]दरंस-नवबधुन्द्रे -शात्रवम।्
धरणी-भरंपर्ृ लु -चक्रमनक्षणोि न्िनशिषे-ुचक्र-कृ ि-नवक्रमाः प्रभाः
ु॥8-33॥
8-33. The mighty Lord Sri Rama displaying his valour with the cluster of his
cutting arrows chopped (the impregnable elephant) the corpulent
Kumbhakarna, onerous to Mother Earth and razed the invincible Indrajit
leading vast legions of (ruthless) demons.
The indomitable Lord Sri Krishna, demonstrating his dauntlessness with his
sharp shafts and his dazzling Sudharshana discus, smashed the rival
rakshasas having huge temples and broad ears including their big brothers
and their huge battalions who had been a burden on earth.
अर् भारर
य
ा हुिवहंप्रनवष्टरा सनहिाः सहोदर-परुस्सरर
ैनप।
अरमाप्य धाम नचरनमष्ट-दाः सिांनिज-मलू -रप-परमक्य
ै
मनेरवाि॥्8-34॥
8-34. After the annihilation of the Rakshasas, Lord Sri Rama reached his
capital Ayodhya with his beloved Sita who convinced the concerned of her
chastity in the fire-ordeal and his brother Lakshmana and other distinguished
devotees like Hanuman, Sugriva and Vibhishana and ruling (his kingdom) for
a long time highly revered by the virtuous, attained perfect identity with his
Archetype (original Form).
With the carnage of the Kouravas Lord Sri Krishna reached Dwaraka with
his dear consort Rukmini who entered the flames during her ascent to the
heavens to delude the demons and his brother Balarama and other
prominent personages and reigning beneficently for years to the intense
delight of his subjects finally became one with his Mularupa. (Original Form).
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 135

मनह-दास-पज्यू -चरणो निजादभदू ्नवनदिाि स् नवष्ण-ुरशसोऽमलात्मिाः।
इह रो दधेजगनि पाप-शान्तरेबहुधामहेनिमनि-दीप्त-गो-नस्थनिम॥्8-35॥
8-35. (Mahidasa and Kalki) Lord Narayana manifested himself as the
worshipful Mahidasa through Itaradevi, the wife of famed Brahmin of a pure
mind listening to the sacred stories of the supreme and composed many
Vaishnava Shastras for redeeming the sins of erring humanity in a world
teeming with troubles.
Lord Narayana, incarnated himself as Kalki, the offspring of the noted
Brahmin Vishnuvyasa, adored by Brahma and other Gods in great ecstasy
and carried the sword dazzling like lustrous diamond to demolish the evildoers in the world.
स-ुिपो-रुचरेरमपाप-कदम
य
ाि ि्िुमािवी-ििरिामपुनेरवाि।्
समरिे भनूर-निज-भनक्त-पनूरिाि स् मजीजिि स् -ुमिसाः स दवे-राट॥् 8-36॥
8-36. (Yagna and Kapila) Lord Narayana, indeed, manifested himself as
Lord Yagna, the son of Akuti, the daughter of Swayambhu Manu and the
ascetic Ruchi Prajapati, shorn of the slime of sin and in due course adorning
the seat of Indra begot the Gods full of intense devotion (through his consort
Goddess Mahalakshmi in her Dakshina form).
Lord Narayana, verily, descended on earth as Kapila, the son of Devahuti
daughter of Manu and Kardama Prajapati, untouched by sin and fond of
austerities and composed his Sankhya philosophy (which instilled intense
devotion for the supreme Lord, the divines and the saints).
स-ुबहृ ि-्परोधर-नमर्ाः-प्र-सहं नि-प्रकटी-भवि-्परम-रौविाकृ निाः।
असरुानहिांवर-नवलानसिी ििाः
ुप्रददावमष्यु सरु-राशरेसधुाम॥्8-37॥
8-37. (Dhanvantri and Mohini) Lord Narayana assumed his young
enchanting form of Lord Dhanvantri displaying the splendid charm of his
pleasant smile when the milky ocean was churned with the Mandara
mountain by deities and demons and delivered the nectar to the group of
divines discarding the inept infernals.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 136

Lord Narayana embodied himself in his female Mohini (Narayani) form,
appearing as an exquisite divine damsel of ravishing beauty with bewitching
protuberant breasts, with fascinating movement of limbs (to delude the
vulnerable swindlers) and distributed ambrosia among the Gods denying it to
the underserving demons.
स-ुजिार दत्त-पद आत्म-शनुद्ध-दाः स-ुकुमार-रप्यभवदषे शाश्विाः।
अिसरूरा शनुच-मिीषरा धिृ ाः परमादरणे मनुि-पङ्गुवोढरा॥8-38॥
8-38. (Datta and Kumara) The eternal Lord Narayana, the purifier of the
minds of the virtuous manifested as the tender-bodied Datta, borne with
great reference by Anasuya of the holy heart wedded to the eminent sage
Atri.
The ever-abiding Lord Narayana incarnated as Kumara of enlightened
knowledge contemplated by the celebrated saints, destitute of envy, and
hallowed the minds of the righteous blessing them with ever-lasting bliss.
दनरिाः सिामषृ भ एष भ-ूधरो वपरुुिहि प्रम-हंस-लक्षणम।्
व्यहरद-्वलक्ष-िम-पक्ष-शोभिंपर-ित्व-नलि-ुसिकानद-वनन्दिाः॥8-39॥
8-39. (Rishabha and Hamsa) Lord Narayana, dear to the upright embodied
in the regal Rishabha form, saluted by saints like Sanaka and others seeking
enlightenment (paratatwa), bedecked with sacred Siddhanta, sported
accepting the highest order of asceticism.
Lord Narayana, the beloved of the virtuous the most excellent who bears the
universe being entreated by the anchorites like Sanaka and others desiring
to know the supreme verities appeared in the excellent Hamsa – form
decked with spotless white wings (for the dissemination of knowledge).
उदपानद धम-य
ििरो ह्यरंहनराः िर-दवे-सोदर उदार-नवक्रमाः।
अनप कृष्ण इत्यनभनहिो मदुेसिांस्वरमवे रस्य सहजो व्यजारि॥8-40॥
8-40. (Hari, Krishna, Narayana and Nara) The lustrous Lord Narayana of
eminent prowess came down to earth as Hari; the same Lord Narayana
incarnated himself as Lord Krishna, his brother. This same radiant and
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 137

valorous Lord Narayana descended on earth as Lord Narayana and Shesha
(the lord of serpents) embodied himself as Nara.
(Nara, Narayana, Hari and Krishna are the sons of Yamadharma, Nara is
God Shesha and obsessed form of the supreme, the remaining three are the
forms of the supreme himself.)
परमात्मिेसििमके -रनपणेदश-रनपण-ेशि-सहस्र-रनपण।े
अनवकानरणेस्फुटमिन्त-रनपणेसिु -नचि-्समस्त-ििवेिमो िमाः॥8-41॥
8-41. Many many salutations to the supreme Lord Narayana always the
same in his Mula-rupa (Arche-type) and also in his Avatara-rupas (being so
propagated by the Shrutis) free from all blemishes (not subject to any
transformation such as birth and death) incarnating in ten distinct forms as
those of Matsya, in a hundred forms like Narayana, in thousand forms as
those of Vishwa and other myriad embodiments like Ajita, every form
constituted of knowledge and bliss, perfect and full.
इनि नचन्तरन्ननवरळान्तरो हनरंप्रणिाम स-प्रणरमादृिोऽमिुा।
अनजिौ परस्पर-सभानजिौ स िौ निकषा निषीदनि परुोपवनेशिौ॥8-42॥
8-42. Thus contemplating Poornaprajna prostrated before Lord Narayana
who greeted him with great affection and sat near Lord Narayana and Lord
Vedavyasa who honoured each other.
नवनवधा नवधार नकल ित्र सङ्कर्ााः वदिंमिुीन्द्र-ििरस्य सन्दु रम।्
अवलोक्य लोक-पनिराििंमहा-सिु -िीर्म
य
ाह रहनस स्म गानममाम॥्8-43॥
8-43. Lord Narayana, master of the universe who conversed with Lord
Vyasa on various topics in his hermitage discerning his charming face for his
concurrence, said these words in solitude to the humble Anandatirtha bent
low with great devotion.
शृणुदवे-कारम
य
व-धार
य
धर
ै
व
य
द ्रददीरम
य
ाणनमदमार-य
सम्मिम।्
भनविाऽन्य-दष्कर-िरं नवधार िि ि्रुणंिवाव-िरणंमहा-फलम॥्8-44॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 138

8-44. Oh! Undaunted Madhwacharya, hearken to this divine (call) endorsed
by Lord Vedavyasa and decided on by me to advise, hard to be
accomplished by others, to achieve the highest aim of your new descent.
अनप-धार सत्रू-हृदरंसिांनप्ररंप्र-नवधार भाष्यमधिुा निजच्छे रा।
अपराः
ै
श्रनुि-स्मनृि-निजार्-य
दूषक
ै
ाः सिुरांनिरोभवनि सनंवदाहिा॥8-45॥
8-45. At present when the true import of Brahmasutras dear to the virtuous
lies concealed and new notorious commentaries composed at will by others
who despise the genuine content of the Vedas and Smritis are rampant, real
knowledge stands masked with its true tenor totally twisted.
अप-ििेमुिेमिरंकृिंिलाः
ै
प्रनि-ििेमुात्म-जििांशभुांगनिम।्
कुरु सत्रू-भाष्यमनवलनम्बिंव्रजाःे स-ुमििे रोजर कवेश्रनुि-स्मिृ ीाः॥8-46॥
8-46. Oh learned Madhwacharya! to repair the injustice meted out by the
erstwhile rogues and to lead our devotees to their divine destinations,
compose a commentary on the Brahmasutras to manifest the meaning
intended by Lord Vedavyasa, the correct interpreter of the Shrutis and
Smritis.
अनमिांनमिामनप नगरंजगद-्गरुोाः इनि िांनिशम्यनवरळेिरान्तराः।
वदिांवरस्तमवदि ि् दा िरोाः नवरहाक्षमाः िलु चराचरशे रोाः॥8-47॥
8-47. The large-hearted Poornaprajna, the pick of discoursers, listening to
the wise words of Lord Narayana, few in number but weighty in meaning
was unable to bear his separation from his preceptors, the masters of the
universe.
भविोनरिाः सिि-सवेिामिृ ेमम मिुमस्तुभगवन्नि-ुग्रहाः।
ि लभरे वल्लभ-िमदृेशंसिु ंजगिांत्ररऽेनप जगदके -मङ्कळम॥्8-48॥
8-48. Oh worshipful Narayana! Allow me to abide here and serve you both
incessantly which is worth a dip in nectar; oh most dear Lord! such unique,
divine bliss can never be gained anywhere in the universe.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 139

कनल-काल-कानलि-गणु ेधरा-िळेस-ुजिो ि ििूमधिुाऽनस्त रोग्र-धीाः।
पर-ित्व वणि
य
मरोग्रिा-विेििुहव्य-दािनमव निन्द्यिेशिु॥े 8-49॥
8-49. When there are hardly any righteous souls that deserve to received
right learning on earth where precious qualities like knowledge and devotion
are well-high demolished by the influence of the Kali-age, imparting of the
divine lore is as good as serving the dogs with sacrificial oblations fit for
deities. (So will I rest content in thy vicinity?)
अनान्र्ष्कु र्वन् अऩ्र्याि् (युिे ः) एर्मन्प पािमपे्यिे 3,4,49 ब्रह्मसूि - अनुव्याख्यान
इनि िंब्रवुाणमरमब्रवीद ्नवभाः
ुभनुव सनन्त सौम्य परुुषा गणुोनचिााः।
नव-मलाि म् णीनिव गणुोनििानिमाि द्ररा नव-शोधर नवशद्धु-गो-गणैाः॥8-50
8-50. Being so entreated by Madhwacharya, the mighty Lord Narayana,
advised thus:
Oh auspicious one! There as yet abide on earth deserving virtuous souls
gifted with qualities of knowledge and devotion but lie stranded like genuine
gems with their ruptured threads: pity them and purge them of their
impurities (like soiled sapphires being salved with water) with the wisdom of
your words.
िव कीनिर
य
ानिम
य नि-मात्रमािरदे ्अशभुाि प्र्भाकर-नवभवे कौनशकाि।्
कमला-करानिव शभुाि प्र्बोधरिे प्रमाज्रा मम नवशषेिोऽनिशम॥्8-51॥
8-51. Let thy glory with my supreme behest ever enlighten the upright and
greatly agonize the ignoble like the sun blooming the lotuses and afflicting
the owls.
इनि सा मही-धर-मिु ाद ्नवनिाःसिृ ा जगिांसिु ार नवशदा सरस्विी।
निज-राज-गो-नवषरिानि-पनूरिंप्र-नववशे मध्व-पर्ृ -ुबनुद्ध-वानरनधम॥्8-52॥
8-52. For the bliss of the blessed, the precious words of Lord Vedavyasa the
sustainer of the world enriched the magnificent mind of Madhwacharya like
rivers gliding out of the caves of the mountains entering the sea surging by
the contact of the moon (on the full-moon day).
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 140

(Madhwacharya heartily accepted the exhortations of Lord Vedavyasa and
resolved to write a commentary on the Brahmasutras).
मिनमत्यवत्ये मनहिंमहिोाः अनभधार बाढनमनि धीर-मनिाः।
अिरोनिर
य ोगमनधरोनपिवाि स्व् -नशरस्यिन्य-सवुहंप्रणमि॥्8-53॥
Madhwacharya of a resolute mind realizing the cherished desires of revered
Lord Narayana and Lord Vedavyasa respectfully saluted them and promised
to execute their mandate impossible to be carried out easily by others.
आम्नारािर इव ित्व-भोधकास्तेपाप-घ्नािर इव पावकााः प्रजािाम।्
लोका वा सकल-भृििरोऽत्र रजे ाः
ुसािन्दा मनुि-सिु-धम-य
सिू-ुमध्वााः॥8-54॥
8-54. The blissful trio, Lord Vedavyasa, Lord Narayana and Guru Madhwa
blazed in Badarikashrama like the three Vedas (Rk, Yajus and Sama) that
impart true wisdom, like the three Holy Fires (Dakshinagni, Garhapatya and
Avahaniya) that destroy the sins of the devotees and like the three worlds
(Bhu, Bhuva, Swah) that sustain the creation.
इनि श्रीमत्कनव-कुल-निलक-नत्रनवक्रम-पनडििाचार-यसिु श्री-िारारण-पनडििाचार-यनवरनचिे
श्री-मध्व-नवजरे महा-काव्ये-आिन्दानङ्किे अष्टमाः सगाः
य
िवमाः सग:
य-[9-55]
चोदरन्तमर् गन्तमुादराि ि्त्र धम-य
जमजंप्रणम्य साः।
सौख्य-िीर्-यकनव-लोक-िारको वदे-िारक-परुस्सरो ररौ॥9-1॥
9-1. Then, Anandatirtha the pre-eminent among the wise kneeling in all
devotion before Lord Narayana the birthless, the son of God Yama urging
him to go back (to preach the virtuous) moved on with Lord Vedavyasa in
the forefront of his abode.
आश्रमान्तरमवाप्य कृष्णिाः श्राव्यमषे सकलंच शश्रुवुाि।्
नचत्त-वनृत्तमि-ुवृनत्त-माि ग् रुोाः साध्ववत्ये गमिोन्मिु ोऽभवि॥्9-2॥
9-2. Reaching Vyasashrama, Anandatirtha realizing the disposition of the
mind of his preceptor Vasishta-Krishna and acting in accordance with it,
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 141

listened (in all earnestness) to all his desired discourses and prepared
himself to return.
मन्द-हास-मृद-सन्दु राििम व्न्दिीरमनभ-वन्द्य सि-्पनिम।्
प्राज्-मौनल-मनणरभ्िज्ुरा िस्य िावदगमन्महा-मनिाः॥9-3॥
9-3. Poornaprajna the crest-Jewel of the erudites, with his placid lovely face
beaming with his pleasant smile, the supreme among the learned worthy of
utmost respect, bowed to Lord Vedavyasa and left the place with his
permission.
िस्य वल्लभ-िमाऽऽस वास-भाः
ूमािसाि प्र्ृ लु -मािसस्य िो।
िात्यजि क्ष् णमनप ह्यसानवदंिैष िार्-नवरही ििोऽभवि॥्9-4॥
9-4. Poornaprajna’s pure mind, the supreme, permanent (which He did not
desert even for a moment) abode of Lord Vedavyasa, did not (even
accidentally) suffer (mental) separation from his master (Lord Vedavyasa),
(though physically he left him to go to Badari).
वीर-दृनष्ट-कृ ि-नसहं -नवभ्रमाः शान्त-दृनष्ट-कृ ि-शान्त-सम्मदाः।
ित्र-ित्र पनर् पथ्य-नवभ्रमाः पवि
य
ादव-ििार सव-यधीाः॥9-5॥
9-5. Poornaprajna scaled down the Himalaya Mountains on his way back
looking like a sporting lion to ferocious animals and a pleasing person to
gentle ones.
वािरन्द्रे इव िीण-य
वानरनधाः वासदुवे इव रत्-राजवाि।्
भीमसिे इव सिू-वर-य
हृि न्िवनृय
त्तंस्व-जिमानििार साः॥9-6॥
9-6. Madhwacharya delighted his disappointed disciples like Satyatirtha by
his return, like Hanuman gladdening the anxious monkey-chiefs by crossing
the ocean like Sri Krishna pleasing the Yadavas and Vasudeva by handing
over the much coveted Shyamantaka jewel and like Bhimasena gratifying
(Dharmaraja and Droupadi) by bringing the Sougandhika flowers.
अनग्नशम-य
मिु -पञ्चषनै
िज
ि
ाः
ै
अन्नमाहृिमलं पर्ृ क्समम।्
कृत्स्नमाददरनमत्यनवस्मराः कृत्समत्तमुलमषे नह क्षर॥े 9-7॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 142

9-7. That Madhwacharya to the satisfaction of his devotees consumed the
entire food brought as alms by the five or six Brahmins Agni Sharma and
others severally to cater to all of his disciples including him is no marvel
since he devours the entire universe consisting of the sentient and the nonsentient objects at the time of deluge.
(Verses 8-12 that describe the exquisite commentary of Madhwacharya on
the Brahmasutras, constitute an Antya-Kulka)
व्यासदवे-हृदरानि-वल्लभंवासदुवेमगणय्य-सद-्गणुम।्
साधरि सकल-दोष-वनजि
य ंज्ाि-भनक्त-दमिन्त-सौख्य-दम॥्9-8॥
9-8. Madhwacharya composed the excellent commentary on the BrahmaSutras, dear to the heart of Lord Vedavyasa bestowing knowledge, devotion
and salvation full of bliss, propagating Lord Narayana as the treasure of
countless virtues and devoid of defects;
उक्तमक्तु मनभधरेमत्तुमंवदे-वाक्यमि-ुवादरन्महुाःु ।
व्यञ्जरि स्म् नृि-वचोनभरञ्जसा िस्य चार्-यमनि-रक्तु -रनुक्तमि॥्9-9॥
9-9. Supporting his profound interpretations with profuse illustrations from
the Vedas and Smritis – sentences to clearly elucidate the meanings,
containing convincing reasoning (in depicting the nature of the divine);
बाल-सङ्मनप भोदरद ्भशृ ंदनिर
य
प-वचिंच पनडििाः
ै।
अप्रमरे-हृदरंप्रसादवि सौम्य् -कानन्त च नवपक्ष-भीषणम॥्9-10॥
9-10. Intelligible to a great extent even to the average (people at large) and
equally tough to be comprehended by the learned, hard to decipher the
deeper import of his words, delightful to the virtuous but dreadful to the
hostiles;
अस्त-दूषणमवन्द्य-भाषणंलनक्षिंसकल-लक्षणाः
ै
समम।्
माििीरमनप िानक-िारकैाः रपमन्यनदव धन्यमात्मिाः॥9-11॥
9-11. Containing words ever fruitful, but never faulty (wrongly used) decked
with the merits of great commentary and venerated even by the divines as
his another blessed form.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 143

एक-नवशं नि-कु-भाष्य-दूषकं ब्रह्म-सत्रू-गण-भाष्यमद्भि
ु
म।्
अप्यदूष्यमििोदिन्त-धीाः भिू-भानव-भवदात्मनभाः क्वनचि॥्9-12॥
9-12. Poornaprajna, the refuter of the twenty-one hostile commentaries
composed his exquisite gloss on the Brahma-Sutras which stands in majesty
uncontroverted by the critics of all times (of the past, present and future).
Equally commendable is his blessed form possessing all the aforesaid
attributes.
गाङ्ग-मङ्गळ-िरङ्ग-भङ्ग-द-प्रान्त-स-ुनश्र-हनर-वश्ेम-कृि-्समाः।
रद-्गिैक-िम-वण-य
लेिकाः सत्य-िीर्
य
इह भाष्यमानलिि॥्9-13॥
9-13. He who inscribes even a word from his consummate commentary will
gather abundant merit on par with that of a noble soul erecting a splendid
sanctuary on the shores of the Ganges shattering the soaring surges:
Indeed blessed is his dear disciple Satyatirtha who transcribed the entire
exposition.
ित्र दवेमनभवन्द्य रािवाि स्व् ानमिो वचि-गौरवाद ्र्द्ु
िम।्
साि-ुगो-नवनवध-भरूिीत्य गो-दावरी-िटमगादलेश-धीाः॥9-14॥
9-14. With salutation to Lord Narayana and due deference to his words,
Poornaprajna escorted by his disciples moved swiftly from Ananta-Mutt and
traversing a few regions reached the bank of the Godavari River.
प्राज्-नवत्तमरमाप्तमुागिाः
ै
पनडििैनिि-िव-शानिनभाः श्रिुीाः।
प्रस्तिुा अनभददौ परीक्षक
ै
ाः षट ्च ित्र समराििडिरि॥्9-15॥
9-15. Madhwacharya critically explained all the Vedic sentences selected to
test his talent by the scholars, specialized in all the eighteen sections of the
Vedas, assembled on the shores of the Godavari River to secure the
preferential awards. He (afterwards) refuted all the six doctrines. (Bhatta,
Prabhakara, Vaisheshika, Naiyayika, Charvaka and Bouddha.)
िेपर्ृ क-्पर्ृ गमंुस्व-शािरा दशि
य
िे च परीक्ष्य निनजि
य
ााः।
सवनय
वि त्व् मनस मख्यु िाः कवेिानस्त िेसदृश इत्यर्ाब्रवुि॥्9-16॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 144

9-16. The learned Brahmins severally tested the Acharya in their respective
Vedic branches and their doctrines but (to their dismay) on being defeated,
they said thus: ‘Oh wise one, really you are omniscient; you are one without
second’.
रिरी-सकल-पक्ष-नशक्षकाः ित्र ससं नद वनरष्ट-सम्मिाः।
शोभिोप-पद-भट्ट-िामकाः पणू -य
सङ्ख्यमिमन्महुुमद
य
ुा॥9-17॥
9-17. One Brahmin named Shobhanabhatta, who dared to interpret and
preach the sacred Vedas and the diverse doctrines in it, recognized to be
the peak in the assembly, repeatedly bowed to Poornaprajna with intense
delight.
रस्तुिानक
ि
क-नशिा-मनणाः सधुीाः विम
य
ाि-समराि न्िराकरोि।्
वदे-भारि-परुाण-निनष्ठिो भाष्यमिेदशृणोि स् मध्विाः॥9-18॥
9-18. The learned Shobhanabhatta, the outstanding logician who had
refuted all the rival doctrines then prevalent, a faithful follower of the four
Vedas, Mahabharata and the eighteen Puranas, listened to his (Acharya’s)
delectable discourses on Brahmasutra-Bhashya and became his devoted
disciple.
िापरषे ुरनिमा-ररौ क्वनचद ्भाष्यमद्भि
ु
नमदंस शश्रुवुाि।्
िारनवन्द-मकरन्दमाप्तवाि अ् च्छ-नपच्छ इव वाञ्चिीिरि॥्9-19॥
9-19. Having studied this exquisite exposition (thoroughly convinced of its
precedence) Shobhanabhatta longed not for any other Shastra like the
white-winged swan that sucks the sweet juice of the lotus (being fully
satisfied) not craving for any other flower.
ित्र-ित्र स सभासुभासरुो िनन्द-िीर्-यसमरोक्त-रनुक्तनभाः।
वानदिो नवशकलय्य िा समा-क्रम्य वाचमनुचिामदुाहरि॥्9-20॥
9-20. The splendid Shobhanabhatta daringly disproved the rival disputants
confronted in difference councils, (well-equipped) with the reasonings
mentioned in Madhwa-Siddhanta showing no concern for the (vanquished
ones) and said these apposite words: (So he is reckoned to be the first
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 145

propagator of Madhwa-Shastra and the first illustrious successor of
Madhwacharya.)
चणू -य
कृद ्नवनवध-शङ्ख-चणूक
य
ाः चणूि
य
ार बहुधाऽप्यशक्नुवि।्
आत्यजद ्नवफल-धीाः प्रदनक्षणा-वि-यवानर-जमिघम
य
प्यहो॥9-21॥
9-21. ‘It is really disconcerting that a betel-lime pounder who triturate the
varied conches, unable to pulverize a Balmuri-conch (a conch twisted to the
right) despite his repeated endeavour is inclined to cast it (the precious
conch) away as of no avail.
अप्रमरे-मनि-शािमीदृशंरिजत्यपुििंस-ुदल
य
भम।्
िस्य िल्यु -मनिरषे दजि
य ो िार्वाऽस्य सदृशोऽनस्त िीच-धीाः॥9-22॥
9-22. He who gives up the study of Poornaprajna’s Shastra, priceless like
the right-twisted conch attained in the company of the righteous, unavailable
to the unworthy, as futile, resembles the felon who forsakes the right-winged
conch. Indeed it is hard to find a similar sinister die-hard.
कोऽनप िंगणु-नवशषे-नवच्च नव-क्रीर भनूर-धिमाप परुूषाः।
ि ह्यिघ-य
गणु-मल्यू माप्यिेभाग्र-दव
ैनमह रोग्रिािगुम॥्9-23॥
9-23. Even the other person, who knowing the greater worth of right-winged
conch sells it (at a higher price) and gathers plenty of money is not discreet
enough as he also fails to realise the full benefit of its invaluable excellence.
(Worship it with devotion and secure the highest objective of life-salvation.)
Indeed, the God of Fortune (Lord Narayana) favours the aspirants in
consonance with their capabilities.
व्यक्तमन्नुनिनमिोऽप्यरंजिाः िस्यरन्न लभिऽेनिलंफलम।्
स्तोक-मािसिरा ििो व्रजिे ि्स्य हन्त परुुषस्य िल्यु िाम॥्9-24॥
9-24. The present generation that is content only with the elevation it obtains
through the study of the priceless Madhwa-Shastra is slow-witted enough as
it forgoes its highest fruits of knowledge, devotion and bliss and resembles
the seller of the right-twisted conch who is satisfied with the affluence he
acquires.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 146

क्रीिवाि ि् र-पनिमह
य
ा-दरंसादरंपिुरुदार-चनेष्टिाः।
अचर
य
ि स् ििमाप सम्पदो रा ि िा वचि-नचत्त-गोचरााः॥9-25॥
9-25. A meritorious monarch (engaged in the welfare of the virtuous)
purchased the priceless conch and worshipping it constantly with intense
devotion attained the highest prosperity inaccessible to word and thought –
(like lordship over different lands and other covetable objectives).
शाि-कल्पक-िरोरमष्यु काः प्राप्नरुाि स् कलमप्यहो फलम।्
रस्तमत्तुम-गणु ंनविम्बरदे ्इत्यदुीर
य
स जिािरञ्जरि॥्9-26॥
9-26. The shrewd Shobhanabhatta assured: ‘Those who gain their greatest
ends by a devoted study of Madhwa Shastra which like the celestial wishfulfilling tree confers all cherished desires, are among the fortunate few that
emulate the laudable king who by intense adoration of the precious conch
earned the highest boon’ and exhilarated the ardent listeners, (creating in
them a hunger for Madhwa-Shastra).
िदृेशाः
ै
कनवनभरवे केवलं हन्त पज्यू -चरणोऽभ्पज्यू ि।
शव-य
शक्र-गरुु-पवू-य
दव
ै
िाः
ै
अप्यलंस-ुसमरोद-्गमोत्सव॥े 9-27॥
9-27. The venerable Madhwacharya was not only lauded by the learned
ones like Shobhanabhatta and others but highly revered by the Gods,
Shiva, Indra, Brihaspati and others on his propounding and propagating of
his propitious Siddhanta.
निम्न-भनूरव सिीाः प्रजा व्रजि ्वानर-दिर
य
ुशिर
ै
पनूर साः।
प्राज्य-िाप-हर-दशि
य
ाम्बिुा िङ्गु-दशे नमव दजि
य ंिुिो॥9-28॥
9-28. Madhwacharya on his way to Udupi, endowed the virtuous in no time
with the sacred tenets (waters) of his doctrine that destroys the deep
distress of Samsara but leaves the wicked untouched like the rainy season
stocking the water (during its flow) in the low-lands and gliding in all haste in
the up-land regions.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 147

कमनय
भाः सकल-लोक-कौिकु
ै
ाः मानििाः पनर् जिाः
ै
समागिाः।
सन्निाम नशव-िाम-कीिि
य ंराजिासि-परुेनवरानजिम॥्9-29॥
9-29. Greeted with great respect on his way by the curious people who had
either seen or heard of his strange deeds, Madhwacharya arrived at Udupi
and paid deep homage to Lord Anantasana known as Shiva, the glory of that
land.
अच्यिु-प्रमनिरच्यिु-नप्ररंिंदश-प्रमनिमागिंिदा।
वन्दमािमवलोक्य रांमदुंप्राप्तवास्तं दवनधि
यनवद्यि॥े 9-30॥
9-30. The delight derived by Achuthapreksha on discerning Poornaprajna
who approached and bowed to him in all deference, knew no bounds.
प्रीनिमार-य
रनिरुत्तमांपरुा प्रनेषिाप्रनिम-भाष्य-दृग र्रौ।
अप्यिोऽनि-शरिीं शनुच-नस्मिंिंनवलोक्य स-ुनचराद ्नददृनक्षिम॥्9-31॥
9-31. The elderly ascetic (of Likucha family) felt elated to read the
unexcelled Brahmasutra-Bhashya sent in advance (by Madhwacharya for
his perusal) but was gladdened to evince the Acharya whom he longed to
see for long, with his pure, pleasant smile.
पणू -यदृनष्ट-जल-धगे हृय ीिवाि भ्ाष्य-सज्ं ममिृ ंसिु ावहम।्
नचत्रमषे रनिराि-्घिाघिो ग्राहरश्चं मिजु ाि म् मुोच िो॥9-32॥
9-32. The elderly ascetic picked up the pleasant nectarine Brahma-Sutra
Bhashya from the ocean (repository) known as Poornaprajna and
disseminated it among his disciples which strangely enough became more
plenteous and magnetizing unlike the rain-bearing cloud sucking the water of
the sea and showering over the people, but fully drained after the rains.
साििुीनिरर् िीनिमािरंभाष्य-सद-्गणु-गणािवणर
य
ि।्
शोभिार गरुवेस्वभाविाः कालिाः कुमि-लीि-बद्धुर॥े 9-33॥
9-33. Then, Madhwacharya of exemplary conduct, with great decorum
expounded the exquisite excellences of his superior Bhashya to his revered
preceptor (Achuthapreksha) who though by nature noble had his knowledge
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 148

cloaked by the then ruling wicked Maya Mata, due to the evil influence of the
Kali age.
उनक्तनभस्तमसकृि स् -ुरनुक्तनभाः भोदरि ब्हळ-धीाः प्रसङ्गिाः।
स्थरेसो नभषनगवास्य हृद-्गिंमलू -दोषमरुचरेनचन्तरि॥्9-34॥
9-34. Poornaprajna during his discourses elucidating repeatedly his Shastra
(to his preceptor) with sound reasonings and finding it even then unpalatable
to him pondered over the root-cause of his lack of interest like a physician
diagnosing his patient for his loss of appetite.
दक्ष-पक्ष-नवहृििे िािरि भ्ीषरि स् मनधक-स्वर-श्रीरा।
हंस-राट ्कनलमलं निराकरोद ्एक-दृनष्टनमव मािसाद ्गरुोाः॥9-35॥
9-35. Madhwacharya the consummate saint defied the main defect firmly
fixed in the mind (of his preceptor) due to the influence of Kali by his sturdy
exegesis marked with its effective resonance of tone, alarming him of the
dangers (of the Adwaita Siddhanta) like the chief-swan scaring the cackling
crow from the Manasa Lake with the flutter of its sturdy wings and shrill
voice.
निष्कळङ्कनमव चन्द्र-मडिलं पड
ुिरीकनमव पल्लु िांगिम।्
वानर शारदनमव प्रसादवि न्चत्तमच्यिु-मिभे षृय ंबभौ॥9-36॥
9-36. The mind of Achuthapreksha greatly glowed with its deficiencies
dispersed by Acharya’s disquisitions like the spotless disc of the moon, like
the blossoming lotus and like pure water in autumn.
आ-ििन्द स नह मध्व-शािमा-कणर
य
ि क् ु-समराग्रही परुा।
मोह-पीि-लवणोदको महुु
ाः प्राक्नपपासरुमिृ ंनपबनन्नव॥9-37॥
9-37. The preceptor of the Acharya till then persistent in the prevailing MayaShastra, having heard and realised the superiority of Madhwa-Shastra
exulted now and then like a thirsty man slaking his thirst with saline water,
sipping the blissful elixir again and again.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 149

नवस्तिृ ान्तर-नवरद-्पदौ-रिी अस्यिांस-समर-प्रकाशिाि।्
िौ रर्ा नवधरुवी अहो अहो-रात्रमप्यरुु-िमो िृ-मोहकम॥्9-38॥
9-38. The elderly saint Achuthapreksha under the aegis of Poornaprajna
revealed the virtues of the auspicious Bhashya and dispersed the ignorance
masking the minds of men like the sun and the moon with the sky as their
shield, dispelling the darkness with their effulgence during the day and night
respectively. Oh the majesty of Madhwa-Bhashya!
सज्जिाि स् ह महादरणे िॄि प्ानपिांप्रकृनििोऽनप्रराकृ नि।
दारुणाघ-गण-दारणंस्म स ग्राहरत्यनप सदुशि
य -िरम॥्9-39॥
9-39. Madhwacharya initiated with deep affection the virtuous into his soulsaving doctrine and as a recognition of his fold, stamped their shoulders with
the Vaishnavite auspicious marks of discus and conch. (Tapta Mudra
Dharana). This Shastra and Sudharshana always unsavoury to the vicious
are potent to destroy the many dreadful sins of the righteous.
िन्विन्य-शरणात्मिाम स् िांनसनद्ध-नवघ्न-मिु -दोष-भषेजम।्
ऐच्छदच्छल-दरोदरादरंरप्य-पीठ-परु-गाः कदाचि 9-40॥
9-40. Once, Madhwacharya during his stay at Udupi, moved by unmixed
mercy for the eligible virtuous devoted to him with no other protector to
sustain them and eager for an effective remedy to remove the intractable
hurdles in their path-way to God (final beatitude), resolved to install the idol
of Krishna.
गोनपका-प्रणनरिाः नश्रराः पिाःेआकृनिंदशमनिाः नशलामरीम।्
नशष्यकैनि-चिरुज
ै
ल
य
ाशरेशोधरनन्नह ििो व्यगाहरि॥्9-41॥
9-41. Poornaprajna then bathed the stone-image of Lord Krishna, the
beloved of the Gopikas and the Consort of Goddess Lakshmi, in MadhwaSarovara after it was cleansed by his three or four disciples.
स्पशि
य
ाद ्भगविोऽनि-पाविाि स् नन्नधाि-पदिांगिांहराःे।
नत्रशं दद्यि-िराः
ै
स-ुदधर
य
ांलीलराऽिरनदमामसौ मठम॥्9-42॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 150

9-42. (The stone idol is a marvellous piece of art of Vishwakarma, prepared
at the behest of lord Krishna who was entreated by Rukmini to provide her
with one such (idol) for her daily worship.)
Madhwacharya carried to his monastery with extreme ease this Idol of Lord
Krishna that had gained divine presence by his most hallowed touch and
could not be lifted even by thirty of his hefty disciples.
मन्द-हास-मृद-सन्दु राििम ि्न्द-िन्दिमिीनन्द्रराकृनिम।्
सन्दु रंस इह सन्न्यधापरद ्वन्द्यमाकृनि-शनुच-प्रनिष्ठरा॥9-43॥
9-43. Madhwacharya, during the immaculate ceremonial installation of the
Idol, brought in an abiding presence of Lord Krishna the son of Nandagopa,
with his beautiful face beaming with the gentle smile, his lovely form
worshipped by Brahma and other gods, invisible to corporeal eyes.
44-47. (The four following verses that form a Kulaka (a bunch of four verses
on the same topic) are to be read together.)
मानििोऽनप नह वशीचकार रो दैवि-प्रनिभराऽऽत्मिाः िलाः।
रारजकू -गणुमात्मिाः स्मरि र्ो जराघनटि-गोत्र उच्यि॥े 9-44॥
9-44. Discerning the unrighteous felon named Jaraghatita (Maradittaya)
impeding the sacrifice of the son of his Veda-guru, most dear to him who
(Jaraghatita) with his supra-talent and the grace of Providence had subdued
even the eminent learned and claimed to himself the competence to perform
sacrifices.
आत्मिाः नप्ररिम-क्रिोरमंुपाप-परुूषमवत्ये घािकम।्
िंनिरस्य जिमप्यर्ानहिंसव-य
भ-ूधर-समर्-य
पवूक
य
म॥्9-45॥
नवश्व-नवस्मर-कराः स्व-िजे सा वन्द्यमाि-चरणाः पिुजि
य
ाः
ै।
नचत्र-नदग-्नवजर-कीत्य-य
कीनिम
य
ाि म्ोदरन्निनुदिंनिजााः प्रजााः॥9-46॥
9-45/46. Poornaprajna dear to Lord Krishna routed him along with the other
prominent rivals in the very presence of the ruler of the region (Balkanya by
name) along with other distinguished scholars pre-eminent in logistic,
exalted in renown and by his astounding (success) over his hostile
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 151

opponents scattered all over the country, being venerated and adored
greatly by the people, ever delighting his devotees, and amazing the World
with his splendour.
वासदुवे-दनरिो मनहष्ठ-धीाः वासदुवेमर् साध्वराजरि।्
धम-य
सिूनुमव धानमक
य ं परुा भीम-मनूिर
य
रमवे भ-ूसरुम॥्9-47॥
9-47. And enabled the righteous Vasudevacharya (the son of his Veda-guru)
to conduct his sacrifice in a manner he had (safeguarded) and emboldened
Dharmaraja to conduct the Rajasuya-Yaga (sacrifice) in his second
incarnation as Bhimasena by slaying the mighty, wicked king Jarasandha, a
big hurdle in their path, who had vanquished many mighty kings with the
boons of gods Rudra and others and arrogated to himself the ability to
execute sacrifices.
राज्यरा समनुचिाि-ुवाक्यरा स-प्रवग्र-यनवभवैरनभ-ष्टवैाः।
नवश्व-वत्ते रुिजुोऽत्र होििृ ांप्राप्यदव
ै
ि-ििीरिोषरि॥्9-48॥
9-48. The brother of Sarvajnacharya (the would-be Vishnutirtha) gladdened
greatly the galaxy of Gods adorning the place of Ritwik (Hotru-sacrificial
priest-hood) with appropriate yagnas blended with Anuvakyas and
Abhistavas inclusive of Pravargya.
स प्ररज्यु निनशिा निशाि-धीाः वैश्व-दवे-वर-शि-सन्तिीाः।
राक्षसासरु-निरास-कृि स् रुाि व्ीर-वर
य
इव भागमापरि॥्9-49॥
9-49. The shrewd brother of Madhwacharya recited the relevant set of
famous ‘Vishwedeva’ holy riks, warding off the demons and devils who
hamper the sacrifice and enabled the concerned Gods to happily receive
their share of oblations offered, like a valiant hero with the power of his arms
distributing the riches to the deserving and denying it to the depraved ones.
वारिुा नत्ररनप पवू-य
पानरिा सव-यदैवि-नजिा िरनस्विा।
रोऽपरोक्ष-वपषुाऽप्यपनेक्षिाः कोऽत्र वणर
य नि िंमहाक्रिमु॥्9-50॥
9-50. Who on earth can portray entirely the stately sacrifice (defies
description) desired by the invincible Mukhyaprana, now present in person in
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 152

his third incarnation as Madhwacharya, who vanquished the other deities in
might by outstripping them thrice in speed in healthy rivalry and was the first
to drink the soma-rasa every time (hence securing the pride of place among
the galaxy of Gods)?
ब्रह्म-वदेि-निनवष्ट-चिेसांकम
य
ित्र करणान्तरंभविे ।्
ज्ापरनन्ननि परात्म-वदेकाः कम
य
धमम
य नप स ह्यचीकरि॥्9-51॥
9-51. Madhwacharya, engaged in imparting divine knowledge, made his
devotees absorbed in contemplation of the supreme spirit realise that like
Shravana, Manana etc., the observance of the prescribed duties of the
different orders of life and the sacred sacrifices for the love of the Lord (not
for worldly attainments) contribute to gain the highest objective, guided the
conduct of holy sacrifices.
रानि-रानि चनरिानि रानि-रा-िीनरिानि च मिो-हराडरहो।
िानि-िानि च नविानि-चिेसो नवश्व-नवस्मर-करानण भानन्त नह॥9-52॥
9-52. It is indeed startling that the entrancing deeds and the enchanting
words of Poornaprajna (of broad mind) sparkle to take the world by surprise.
सरस्विीवनृय
त्त-करीाः शरीनरणांअिीत्य बह्वीाः समिीि-गोत्रकाः।
परुवे कृष्ण-नप्ररमापदश्रमंपर्ृ -ुप्रबोधाः पिुरुत्तमाश्रमम॥्9-53॥
9-53. Poornaprajna who earlier exhorted the people that the Vedic
sentences that superficially seem to connote the passing pleasures of
heaven really in their primary sense aim at supreme bliss, now readily
crossed the Godavari and other rivers (that sustain and satisfy the human
beings) and Sahya and other mountains and reached the famous
Badarikashrama, the esteemed abode of Lord Narayana.
Poornaprajna who had hied to Badarikashrama before he composed his
extra-ordinary Bhashya and gave up all the traditional family practices and
accepted the excellent order of an ascetic, unmindful of the exhortations of
others to work for subsistence, now crossed the Godavari and other rivers
and the Sahya mountains and reached the famous Badarikashrama again.
(The word पुिेर् in the verse admits of two interpretations.)
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 153

सहभोगमिन्य-लभ्मस्म
ै
हिमुर्द्ू
प-विेददौ परुा नह।
अिवक्ष्ये परंस्वभीष्ट-कत्र
ेप्रनि-दािंुहनररैघरि ि्मवे॥9-54॥
9-54. Intensely pleased with the fulfilment of his divine mission to propagate
the supremacy of Lord Narayana through his memorable volume
Brahmasutra-Bhashya, Lord Vedavyasa (Narayana) who as Lord Rama had
blessed Madhwacharya in his former incarnation as Hanuman for his
exceptional services (like the search of Sita-Mata) with the rulership of
Satya-loka (Sahabhoga) impossible to be attained by others, now unable to
find any other similar favour, intensified the same munificence. (Sovereignty
over Brahma-loka.)
प्रणम्य गरुुमादरादर् निरोगिो रोग्रिाः
स िस्य जगिांनहिंनवदधिो गिाः सािगु
ाः।
मनहष्ठ-हृदरो महा-मनहम-नसधरुािन्दिो
निजैरनभ-गिोऽिमद ्रजि-पीठ-वासंहनरम॥्9-55॥
9-55. With due deference (obeisance) to his (revered) preceptor Lord
Vedavyasa, the benefactor of the universe, Poornaprajna the ocean of
majesty, with his (Vedavyasa’s) befitting behest departed with his disciples;
He being greeted with great glee by his adherents on his return to Udupi,
bowed to Lord Ananteshwara, its presiding deity.
इनि श्रीमत्कनव-कुल-निलक-नत्रनवक्रम-पनडििाचार-यसिु श्री-िारारण-पनडििाचार-यनवरनचिे
श्री-मध्व-नवजरे महा-काव्ये-आिन्दानङ्किे िवमाः सगाः
य
दशमाः सग:
य - [10-56]
सपनद समस्कुरुि भषृ ंमाधव-गणु-साधकोऽर् मध्व-रनवाः।
भगृ -ुकुल-निलक-स्थािंिाप-कराः पाप-पािािाम॥्10-1॥
10-1. Then (with obeisance of Lord Krishna at Udupi) the illustrious
Madhwacharya propagating the propitious qualities of Lord Narayana
(Consort of Goddess Lakshmi) causing suffering to the rival confutants
treading the sinful track, instantly embellished the holy Tulu region of Lord
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 154

Parashurama (the best of the Bhrigu-born) like the blazing Sun entering the
Vrishabha, the seat of Shukra promoting the virtues of the spring-season
(bloom of blossoms and cooing of cuckoos) and causing woe to the
wayfarers with his scorching heat.
दशमनि-नशष्याः कनश्चि श् भु-जििार
ै
कुिहूल-ििारै।
नवनवध-स-ुवत्तृ ंवाक्यंकाव्यनमवोचेस-िारक-स्तवकम॥्10-2॥
10-2. A certain disciple of Madhwacharya spoke a few sentences to the
humble, virtuous multitude full of curiosity extolling the favourable feats of
the eminent Acharya in a melodic manner like an epic poem (e.g.
Naishadha) hymning the glories of a great hero in many meters.
भवुािाद्भि
ु-मध्व-चनेष्टिंि वदमा े नप सरुारषुा वरम।्
सकलं िलु नकन्तुनकनञ्चद-प्यर् शश्रुषू-ुजिार वडरि
य ॥े 10-3॥
10-3. We cannot enumerate in entirety the marvellous miracles of
Madhwacharya, even (if endowed) with a superhuman span of life; yet we
will recount a few (according to our ability, for the satisfaction) of our desiring
devotees.
क्वनचदीश्वर-दवेमषे भपूंिििंपाि-जिंनवधापरन्तम।्
स्वमनप प्रनि-चोदरन्तमचू ेनक्रररा िोऽकुशलाि प्र्बोधरनेि॥10-4॥
10-4. When the ascetic Acharya was also compelled by the (relentless) ruler
of a region who pressed all the passers-by into digging service, he
expressed: ‘Oh king, enlighten us who are not experts, on how to dig (in
digging)’.
प्रकारंप्रकटीकिम
य
ु आ् रभ् नवरराम िो।
महीरो-मनि-माहात्म्याद ्वव
ै
श्रिे ििि ि् लाः॥10-5॥
10-5. The stupid Ishwaradeva, to school the saint speciously started to strike
(dig); but Lo! (Propelled by the Acharya the incarnation of Mukhyaprana
subject to his sway, he stopped not (even though the Acharya journeyed
ahead). Such was the spell of his supremacy!
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 155

िाििेिेाििेाििेोििूिे ििुिन्नुााः।
िािािा िो ििूंिाििेाििूिाऽिन्नु
ाः॥10-6॥
10-6. There are no souls not spurred by the sublime Sukhatirtha, shorn of all
slurs, sovereign among the sentients. But the sachem stimulator, the
supreme Lord of Lakshmi, the singular sustainer of the Supra-humans (like
Brahma and others) is the sole one, not subject to (Mukhyaprana’s) sway.
रमशषे-भव-प्रभवाः स्मरिा मसिु ानब्धरपनै
ि ि नचत्रनमदम।्
मरुिीदृनश भानन्त नह रि-्स्तविेरम-शषे-भव-प्रभवाः स्म रिााः॥10-7॥
10-7. This subjection of the surly Ishwaradeva to the sovereign Acharya is
no surprise since sheer surrender by the sacred ones sets them scot-free
from the sea of sorrows of Samsara (worldly life) and superior souls like
Shesha, Shiva and Samavarti (Yama) scintillate singing his splendours.
सञ्चरन्नञ्चिीराः कदानचद ्नवभाः
ुनवष्ण-ुपद्यास्तटं वष्ण
ै
वाग्रसे राः।
प्रापदाप्तनै
िज
य
र
ै
षे नशष्यव
ै
िृय
ाः त्यक्त-नवश्व-प्लवंशात्रवािङ्किाः॥10-8॥
10-8. The mighty, meritorious Madhwacharya, the most admired among the
adherents of Lord Vishnu, accompanied by his faithful followers, once
reached the bank of the Ganges where the ferrymen had forsaken their
ferries for fear of foes.
इमाि स्व-स्व-पवूाश्र
य
रािात्म-वाक्याि स् -लीलं दरालुाः स मलू ाश्ररात्मा।
निषद्धेॄ
ििादृत्य चािन्य-लङ्घ्ांिदाऽऽत्याररि ि्ांिदीं ससं नृिंवा॥10-9॥
10-9. The merciful Madhwacharya, unmindful of the warnings of the
objectors enabled his disciples to cross the river, impossible to wade through
without boats with extreme ease by being their main-stay advising them to
support each other in succession, as he helps his staunch devotees who
believe implicitly in his philosophy and submit themselves to his illustrious
lineage, to traverse the sea of samsara.
वाररि-वाररि वैनर-सहृुदोऽमिू म्ाररि-माररि पार-गमिाि प्र्ाक।्
आपिि आलपि इत्यवददच्चैाः स त्वरक-राज-परुुषािनुचि-वाचा॥10-10॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 156

10-10. Madhwacharya adverted the army-men aloud and talked to them in
their own tongue while they were coming down in the water crying
glamorously ‘Avert, avert, the allies of our adversaries: Fordo, fordo the foes
before they ford through (reach the shore)’.
ि जिा जलेपिि साहसादहो ि भरंनह वो बहुिराऽबहोजि
य
ाि।्
भविांपनिंनक्षनि-पनिंनददृक्षवाः प्रनि-राम केि कलहं नचकीषर्
य ॥10-11॥
10-11. ‘Oh Indiscreet! rush not rashly into the water. Queer indeed! While
you are many in measure (number) there is no fear from us who are few and
when we are coming to contact your Sultan. Why you wish to wrangle with
us?’
वचसत्ये ििे स पराि न्य् रुणद ्भजुगाि ि् रन्द्रे इव मन्त्र-बलाि।्
उदिाररि प्नर-जिंमनृि-भी-सनरिश्च दवे-सनरिश्च समम॥्10-12॥
10-12. The Acharya thus withheld (the soldiers) with his persuasive tone
from proceeding further like a magician stilling the serpents by the power of
his spell (Garuda-mantra) and simultaneously averted the eminent deathfear of his disciples (blocking them like a river) and enabled them to cross
the celestial sea.
निनवक
य
ारचनरिोऽनप परीिाः क्रूर-नकङ्कर-सहस्र-िरिे ।
स व्रजन्नदुलसज्जगदीशाः नसहं रानिव सगृ ाल-समहू॥े 10-13॥
10-13. Madhwacharya, the monitor of the universe pushed ahead untouched
by fear even when encircled by thousands of relentless soldiers, glistening
like a brave lion girdled by a horde of jackals.
अप्रकम्प्य-वपषुंसरुासरु
ाः
ैनसहं -सहं ििमिेमन्नुिम।्
प्राप्तमात्म-िगरानन्तकं िपृाः प्रक्ष्ये सौध-नशिरेनस्थिोऽब्रवीि॥्10-14॥
10-14. The Turkish ruler seeing from the top-floor of his mansion the
imposing (long-armed), graceful Acharya hard to be moved even by deities
and demons approaching his city premises, spoke thus:
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 157

नरप-ुिृप-प्रनणनध-प्रनि-शङ्करा पनर्ि-पाटि-कमनय
ण दीनक्षिाः
ै।
स-ुमिु मेपरुुशैाः परुशाः
ै
कर्ंरम-भट
ैनरव िानस नवनहंनसिाः॥10-15॥
10-15. ‘Oh, pleasing Saint! It is really strange that you are not slain by my
savage soldiers, merciless as the messengers of death, specialized in
pestering the passers-by suspecting them to be enemy-spies.’
आप्लव-दवे-िदी-िरणंिेहन्त कर्ंच नचकीषनय
स नकं त्वम।्
िंनिगदन्तनमनि-प्रभृिीह स्माऽह महा-परुुशोत्तम-दासाः॥10-16॥
10-16. Oh hallowed sage! How could you get over (cross the river) without a
gadget (boat)? What is your task on hand (wish to do)? Madhwacharya, the
staunch devotee of the supreme Lord Vishnu being so questioned, thus
replied:
रोऽसौ दवेो नवश्व-दीपाः प्रदीप्ताः कुमाः
य
सव
ं
िि-्पराि-ुग्रहेण।
रामस्तावि ि्णूम
य
ाशामदुीचीम इ्त्याद्यंिद-्भाषरा नचत्र-वाक्यम॥्10-17॥
10-17. (Madhwacharya surprisingly enough answered in Persian) ‘we work
up such super-human miracles with the exquisite grace of the resplendent
God, who illumines the entire universe with his brilliance: We intend to move
to the north, forthwith’.
गााीर
ं
धनृिमरुु-वीरम
य
ार-य
भावंिजे ोऽग्र्यंनगरमनप दशे -काल-रक्तु ाम।्
राजाऽस्य स्फुटमपु-लभ् नवनस्मिोऽस्म
ै
राज्याध
ं
सपनद समपर
य
ाम्बभवू॥10-18
10-18. Stunned with this marvel of Madhwacharya the King greatly realizing
the solemnity, intrepidity, magnificence, erudition, dignified conduct,
resplendence and apposite talk (in keeping with the time and place) readily
parted with half of his kingdom.
दडिाह-य
बनुद्ध-नवषरोिपृ -परुूषाणांराज्याह-य
बनुद्ध-नवषरोऽभवनदत्थमेषाः।
िीनिंप्रकाशनरिमुवे नवपत्सुकारांगन्तंुप्रभाःुप्रसभिोऽनप िर्ा व्यधाि स् ाः॥10-19॥
10-19. Madhwacharya deemed by the soldiers as fit for slaughter (being
suspected as an enemy-spy) was realised by the distinguished ruler (as a
celebrated celestial) deserving half of his domain. The Acharya, though
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 158

potent to push ahead with force conducted himself (in a civil manner) to lay
down a distinctly lesson for his disciples to copy in times of distress.
कदानचच्चोराणांनिकरमवलोक्यानभ-पििां
अवस्थाप्य स्वीराि क् र-ग-पट-नपडिार्-यमनि-कृि।्
चरन्निेष्वे िेािर् नमर् इहाघािरदहो
नवभाः
ुसम्मोह्य प्राग नवजर इव सशं प्तक-गणाि॥्10-20॥
10-20. Once, discerning a band of bandits intruding upon them, the mighty
Madhwacharya, at will brushing aside his adherents on the safe side tripped
hither and thither among the thieves with a lump of cloth in his hand to baffle
them to believe that it contained their pelf, thus leading them to wrangle and
slay each other in trying to snatch it, like Arjuna slaying the demons
(Samsaptakas) with the Sammohana Missile.
अन्यत्र च चोराि ध्न्य-प्रवरोऽसौ शरूाि श् ि-सङ्ख्याि प्र्ाप्ताि स्व् -नजघासं िू।्
एकेि िुनशष्यणे ाऽकृ ष्ट-कुठाराि न्िस्तानिि-रथ्यू ािर्द्ावरि र्द्ाक॥् 10-21॥
10-21. In another place when a crowd of valiant robbers numbering a
hundred rushed to slaughter them, Madhwacharya, the Supreme among the
blessed, forthwith put them to rout. He urged his lone disciple Upendratirtha
to snatch their own axe and to heavily belabour their leader with it. (Such is
his glory!)
क्वनचनच्छला-च्छटा-भ्रमादमंुस-सङ्मत्यजि।्
आवक्ष्ये दस्यवाः पिु
ाः कुिहूलाि ि्मािमि॥्10-22॥
10-22. In one place when some burglars intended to assault the Acharya
along with his followers, he let them go suffering an illusion that they were
some blocks of stone and again on seeing them as human beings,
(experiencing a change of heart) they laid themselves low before them with
reverence. This is another miracle of the master.
सत्योच्छेदेसच्छे पािंव्याघ्राकारंदत्य
ै -व्याघ्रम।्
प्राळेरार्द्ेाः प्रान्तेप्राज्ाः पाणले ीला-लेशिेाऽस्यि॥्10-23॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 159

10-23. The omniscient Acharya moving in the precincts of the Himalayas
hurled down a fierce demon (rushing speedily) in the shape of ferocious tiger
with a keen desire to slay his disciple Satyatirtha (carrying the sacred small
chest containing the images of Gods and Saligrama Stones), with a light pat
of his (sinewy) palm. (Such in the vigour of his might and as such he will
drive out with extreme ease, the distress of devotees.)
प्राप स िारारणिाः शद्धु-नशलात्म-प्रनिमााः।
रासुस पद्मा-सनहिो दोष्यनहिाः सनन्ननहिाः॥10-24॥
10-24. The Acharya was blessed by Lord Vedavyasa (another embodiment
of Lord Narayana) at North Badari with sacred stone images (the famed
Vyasa-Musti) in the form of eight fistful Sand-lumps where Lord Narayana,
the eternal foe of the God-despisers is ever-present with his consort
Goddess Lakshmi.
पाराशराः
य
पर-ित्व-प्रनसद्ध्य
ै
िात्रार्
य ं
परमंभारिस्य।
व्यक्तंुवक्तंुनिरिुनक्त स्म साक्षाद ्एिंधन्यंभवुिेमन्यमािाः॥10-25॥
10-25. Lord Vedavyasa (son of sage Parashara) knowing Madhwacharya
(the incarnation of Lord Vayu) as the most competent among the selfless
few in the universe assigned the task of propagating the real nature of ParaTatwa (Supreme divine) by expounding clearly the purport of the great epic
Mahabharata.
िीर्ष
े
ुिीर्ष
े
ुच सौख्य-िीर्ाः
य
क्षत्रेषे ुच क्षत्रे-नवदांवनरष्टाः।
गोनवन्दमावन्द्य सहािगो ु ऽगाद ्गङ्गांपिुस्तङ्गु-िरङ्ग-मालाम॥्10-26॥
10-26. Anandatirtha, the Supreme among the souls, knowing the hallowed
regions saluted the varied images of Lord Narayana with intense devotion in
all holy lakes and sacred spots (like Kurukshetra) on his way again from
Badari to the celestial Ganges with her rows of high rising billows.
प्लवर
ै
पिेामवलोक्य नसधंुसरोज-बधंुच िदाऽऽप्त-नसधमु।्
िटेनिषडणािनधकं नवषडणाि न्िरीक्ष्य नशष्याििरि ्स एिाम॥्10-27॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 160

10-27. Madhwacharya seeing no ferries to take them to the other side and
further discerning his disciples squatting on the shore greatly distressed
(being puzzled with the future course of action) crossed the river Ganges
(with his yogic strength)
ि वािरन्द्रे स्य नवलनङ्िाब्धाःे ि वा िरन्द्रे स्य नवहिर
य
ुस्याम।्
इमऽेस्मरंस्तद-्वपषुोऽन्यर्ाऽस्य शक्तस्य शङ्क्यिे नवपि क् र्ंिाः
ै॥10-28॥
10-28. At this juncture, his disciples did not bring to mind the well-high
impossible feat of (heroic) Hanuman courageously crossing the roaring seas
or (brave) Bhimasena traversing the Ganges during his boyish sea-sports:
otherwise (if they had remembered them and realised that their Acharya is
the third incarnation of Lord Vayu) how could they apprehend any danger
and doubt the inherent competence of the mighty Madhwacharya to wade
through the waters?
जगि-्प्रदीपानरि-गो-गणाढ्ेनदवाकरेमध्व-नदवाकरेच।
अव्यक्त-रपेनश्ररमत्यजि र्द््ाक्सहाम्बजुस्त
ै
न्नरिाम्बजु ानि॥10-29॥
10-29. Like the lotuses losing their lustre when the Sun, the luminous lamp
of the world sets, the disciples of Madhwacharya (who enlightens the
universe with his treasure of profound words) were aggrieved, with their
eyes faded on his immediate disappearance.
पदंपशोवा
यनवििा-ििजू
ाः िीत्वा
य
िदीं िावददीि-सत्त्वाः।
अिार्द्-य
वासााः स कुिहूलार्द्
ै
ाः िदृ वे-भदूवे-मख्यु व
ै
व
य
न्द॥े 10-30॥
10-30. The King, the Brahmins and others standing on the shore, struck with
surprise to see mighty Madhwacharya traverse the river with extreme ease
with even his drapery not drenched (well versed in Jalastambhana art) like
Garuda (the son of Vinuta) crossing leisurely with the steps of a cow, humbly
bowed to him.
भीिर
ै
रािरेनिमात्रमत्र ि-िारकैरप्यर् िारकैाः साः।
स्व-िजे सा नवनस्मि-भपू-िन्नु
ाः
ै
प्लविे नशष्याि न्िरिाररि ि्ाम॥्10-31॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 161

10-31. Then, Madhwacharya saw his disciples (waiting on the other shore)
being rowed through the Ganges in the boat, brought by the boat-man
frightened to ferry for fear of foes but now being sent by startled sovereign
subject to Acharya’s sway.
नवशङ्कटम स्व् -स्तनटिी-िटं िेदीप-प्रदीप्तंजििानभपणूम
य ।्
सञ्चोदरद-्पनडिि-मडिलाढ्ंिार्ावलोकोि क् -हृदोऽभ्पश्रि॥्10-32॥
10-32. The students of Madhwacharya solicitous of seeing their master, saw
the broad bank of the celestial river (Ganges) beaming with lights and
crowded with people and pundits putting forth their moot-points. (Before the
Acharya).
आम्नारमाम्नार-नवदांनवदग्धंस-भाव-भदेंप्रवदन्तमत्र।
दैव्यांसभारानमव पद्म-रोनिंप्रक्ष
ै
न्त साक्षाि स् िु -िीर्म
य
िे॥े 10-33॥
10-33. The disciples distinctly saw Anandatirtha, an authority among the
knowers of Vedas seated in the assembly of scholars on the shore of the
Ganges expounding the deeper import of the esoteric Vedic sentences,
beaming like (Chaturmukha) Brahma in the council of the celestials (a fitting
comparison and a tacit suggestion of the Acharya being the next
Chaturmukha Brahma).
प्राप्तस्तिो हनस्ति-राज-धािीं मासािवुासहे स वास-रोग्राि।्
मठान्तरऽे िन्त-गणुान्तराः सि ए्कान्त-दशे ेसनरिोऽसमीप॥े 10-34॥
10-34. From that place he hied to Hastinapura, once the capital of the Kurus
(where he ruled as king designate for years together during his second
incarnation of Bhimasena) and stayed during the Chaturmasya period suited
for the observance of vows, in a monastery in some solitary place a little
away from the Ganges, contemplating on the auspicious attributes of Lord
Vishnu.
नभत्त्वा भवुंदवे-िदी जगाम शािा-नवशषेणे निषनेविंुिम।्
वाणी च रि-्प्रष्ये िरा कृिार्ा नशवानद य -वन्द्या ि िदत्र नचत्रम॥्10-35॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 162

10-35. It is not astounding that the divine river Ganges approached, by
ramifying herself and ripping open the earth (near the monastery) for the
second time, (her first appearance being in Madhwa-Sarovara at Udupi), to
attend on the Acharya (observing his Chaturmasya vow) when Goddess
Bharati, saluted by Lord Shiva and others regards herself as highly blessed
in serving him with devotion – Thus heightening the majesty of the master.
गरुु-प्रबहस्य
य
पदारनवन्दंनवदूरिाः सा प्रणिाम मिूा।य
औदार-य
सौन्दर-य
ििंुििंुिांआलक्ष्य नशष्यर
ैनि-नवनस्मिंिाः
ै॥10-36॥
10-36. The disciples were immensely startled to see the embodied (in a
prakritic form) supernal Bhagirathi endowed with exquisite beauty salute
from a distance the lovely feet of their celebrated preceptor.
ििेोप-राििे कदा-चिार् वाराणसीं पाप-निवारणिे ।
अवानद वाणी बनलिाः स्व-नशष्याि न्वलोक्य लीलावसरऽे वनलप्ताि॥्10-37॥
10-37. Then (at the end of the Chaturmasya period) Madhwacharya capable
of destroying the sins of the dedicated moved to holy Kashi where he once
perceived his lusty pupils puffed up with pride during their period of play
uttering these words:
निरद्धु-नसद्ध्य
ै
रगुपनद्ध वीरम-्मन्या भवन्तोऽनभ-पिन्तुमांर्द्ाक।्
समस्त-शनक्तं ि रिुनक्त राः स्वांअत्रास्मदाज्ांस निराकरोनि॥10-38॥
10-38. ‘You all, who assume yourselves as valorous, be prepared to confront
me forthwith in a wrestling bout and in case you contend not with all your
might you will be contravening my mandate. (Lest they might complain
afterwards that they did not exert themselves fully against their revered
master.)
इिीररि प्ञ्च-दशष
ै
रिू
ाः प्राप्ताि प्र्-रद्धुाि र्गुपनन्नपात्य।
उत्थीरिांरस्य समर्ि
य
ा स्याद ्इनि ब्रवुाणाः शिक
ै
जह
य
ास॥10-39॥
10-39. Saying so, Madhwacharya floored down simultaneously all the fifteen
fustian youths who fell on him forthwith in full force with a gentle smile and
said these words ‘Let the strong one stand up!’
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 163

सौमरेवंगौरवमावहनन्त िवाङ्गमङ्गाङ्गल
ु
रश्च िोऽङ्गे।
परुा नविश्राम इिो दरोलो स्वानमि न्वमञ्च्यु त्ये वदस्तं दा ि॥े 10-40॥
10-40. The disciples groaned ‘Oh dear Master, your very limbs and fingers
placed on our body weight as heavy as the Meru Mountain. We will not
survive; be kind to release us’.
ििेार् मक्तु
ै
रनि-नवस्मरस्तैाः अवाप्यिालोच्य नह िि-्स्वरपम।्
रद-्भ्रू-नवजाृ णे स-शा-ुशक्रं जगि स् मस्तंनिरिंनिकामम॥्10-41॥
10-41. (in response to their entreaty) being relieved of the stress of their
distress (the burden of his limbs and fingers) they were heavily stunned by
his enormous strength as they could hardly realise Madhwacharya’s innate
strength (he, being the third incarnation of Lord Vayu) whose sportive
movement of the eye-brows regulates the universe comprising of Shankara,
Shakra and others, at will. (What of the disciples, even if they were fifteen!)
स-दाक्ष्यमानक्षप्त-समस्त-पक्षको रनिाः प्रभंुकोऽप्यमराविी-पदाः।
नजगीषरा ज्ाि-सहार-कमण
य
ाः प्रसाध्यिांसाधिित्ये दुाहरि॥्10-42॥
10-42. A certain monk by name Indrapuri dexterous in the doctrines of all
disputants, with a desire to defeat the Acharya urged him to substantiate his
tenet that ‘Karma supported by Jnana’ (action buttressed by knowledge)
alone can attain the highest objective (salvation).
ससं ानधिार्
े
भगवत्यरनुक्त-नवि प्प्रच्छ स ज्ाि-पदार्म
य
ग्रु-धीाः।
ज्ािाः स िेज्ान्यनस चन्ने चन्ने स प्रश्नो घटेिनेि निराकृिष
ै
िम॥्10-43॥
10-43. When the Acharya convincingly proved his proposition, the relentless
Indrapuri deplete of any reasoning to refute him, out of chagrin asked him to
define the word (knowledge). Indrapuri was repudiated with this retort: ‘if you
claim to be a learned man then you definitely know its meaning: if you deny,
then the question does not crop up.’ (Since you cannot interrogate about
things unknown.)
नविि-िम-िमोऽन्तं साधरन्त्या नििान्तं सदनस-सदनस रेजे व्याख्यरा व्यास-नशष्याः।
सकल-समनर-हस्तााोज-बधानभिन्दी शरनद-शरनद चन्द्रश्चनन्द्रका-सम्पदेव॥44॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 164

10-44. Madhwacharya, the disciple of Lord Vedavyasa dazzled in all
dignified assemblies, greatly dispersing with his discourses the gloom of
diffused ignorance, endorsing the folding hands of hostile contestants like
the moon dispelling the darkness with the flood of his light and relishing the
folding petals of fading lotuses.
जििंसमर-ेसमरेजगिाः प्रनर्िेसमरेसमरदेनमि।े
सनिरासमरऽेसमरेनस्थनि-रकु ्स्ववभास-मरऽेसमरष्टे-नधरा॥10-45॥
10-45. (Sri Narayana Panditacharya distils the essence of the disquisitions
of Madhwacharya proclaiming the majesty of the Almighty) thus:
‘Lord Narayana, of the nature of pure knowledge (devoid of all impurities),
abiding eternally without any modification in the vicinity of all sentient souls
(entirely distinct from them), highly spoken of primarily by all the words in the
Vedas and scriptures, (so not undescribable) with his peerless free-will (not
out of illusion) creates, sustains and dissolves the universe at regular
intervals.
विस्व
य
ाध्यनध सव
ं
दीव्यदेंसोऽनिशंस्विन्त्रो नवष्णाः
ु।
उज्जासर दष्टािांसस्कं ुरु साधिू ग्णुानभपणू ोऽप्यगणु
ाः॥10-46॥
10-46. The independent Lord Narayana, full of auspicious attributes and free
from the taint of Trigunas (Prakrati) habits in the hearts of all animate beings
in the universe, always engaged in sport with them, hurling the vicious in
abysmal deep and purifying and modelling the virtuous into splendorous
forms.
असमोत्तमो मिोऽसौ नश्रराः-पनिनवश्व
य
िो नवनभन्नात्मा।
परमाि प्र्काममर्ाि
य
प्र्काशरामास सत्ये ादीि॥्10-47॥
10-47. The dissertation of the Acharya highlighted many exquisite ideas like
Lord Narayana, Consort of Goddess Lakshmi who stands without an equal
or superior who can be known to some extent only through the Veda and
such similar scriptures, entirely strange when compared to the worldly
beings,
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 165

समािरा राऽिमाऽऽस माररा ििराऽरमा।
िरासिा िाऽस रा ि राििाऽललिा[ऽ]िरा॥10-48॥
10-48. The interpretation of Madhwacharya is authoritative as it is based on
sound Pramanas (valid reasonings). It stands unexcelled and never to be
controverted by the spacious Maya-Shastra, (full of fallacious interpretations)
and any version inimical to it will lead its votaries to the misery of eternal
damnation.
यासमानाया ििमा मायमा अनमा आस, अयमा याच नयासना नासेन्ि न, अनया अललना
यािना (भर्न्ि) इि अतयर्ः
प्राज्ो राज्ांनत्रनदव-पदवीं कौरवंक्षत्रेमाप्ताः
सस्मारार् स्व-नवहृनि-पिद्धनस्त-रद्धुोत्सवािाम।्
सत्यात्माद्यैनरह पनरवृिो भानवमारीच-दृनभाः
नवस्मरेाः
ै
स्वनै
िज
य -िृप-िि-ूहेनि-दृष्ट्याऽनििष्ट्यु
ाः
ै॥10-49॥
10-49. Then, Poornaprajna visited Kurukshetra, the gate-way to heaven for
the kings (who laid down their lives in this holy land, Dharmakshetra)
surrounded by his disciples Satyatirtha and others who were startled to see
the fake-hermit shown by the Acharya as the future Maricha, the real
despiser of Lord Vishnu and delighted to recognize the mace handled by him
in his incarnation as Bhimasena. He recollected his tussle with the elephants
that were floored down by him in sport. (These reminiscences are a
suggestion that Madhwacharya was Bhimasena. His knowledge of the past
and the future speaks of his omniscience.)
नवप्रात्मशे ाः क्षणार्
ं
कृि-िनिरनशनि-श्रीहृष
य ीकेश-दशे े
स्पष्टंदृष्टोऽप्यदृष्टाः सपनद नवनहिवाि न्वस्मरंदहे-भाजाम।्
स्वप्नेस्व-प्रनेरिान्य-स्थल-ग-निज-िरो-पाहृिभ
ै
क्ष्य
य -भोज्यैाः
प्राच्याः
ै
प्राभोजरि स्व् ंगरुुमनिल-गरुुं वदेरि व्दे-बधमु॥्10-50॥
10-50. In a holy place called Hrisikesha, Lord Shankara lustrous white
bowing to Madhwacharya in the guise of a Brahmin entreating him to accept
alms, seen distinctly but disappeared instantly, dumbfounding the disciples
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 166

and urging his devotee in another Kshetra in a dream, to feast him
sumptuously with diverse delicious dishes made the people present there,
realise that he (Madhwacharya) was his preceptor and the preceptor of the
whole world, the correct interpreter of the Vedas.
अवाप्तवाि प्िुनरष-ुपािमस्मरद ्रमा-पनिंस परश-ुराममादराि।्
स-राजकेळ्ररुु-कदळी-सहस्रकं िदाऽऽददत्त्यवनसनि-दत्तमत्तुमम॥्10-51॥
10-51. Again, having arrived at another sacred place called Isupata, he
devoutly remembered Lord Parashurama, the consort of Goddess Lakshmi
and could eat with ease a thousand excellent, plump Rajakeli Plantains
offered by the king of that place during his dinner. (Mid-day-meal)
स शङ्कर-पद-निजोप-हृिमाप्य गोवाख्य-गां
गनरष्ठ-कदळी-लसद-्दश-शिी-चिष्कु ं चरि।्
पराः कलश-पञ्चक-नत्रक-रगुानभपणू
ं
पपौ
अदृष्ट-गनिरप्यभन्नूपृ-िृ-मडिलैरुद्यिैाः॥10-52॥
10-52. With his advent in Goa, Madhwacharya (Vrukodara) could consume
four thousand bulky plantains offered by a Brahmin by name Shankara and
empty thirty pots of milk and moved on unseen by the attendants of the King
(who wanted to retain him in his kingdom) dispatched to deter him.
अरमवे गो-नवषरिोऽनप सदनस जििानर्ि
य ो जवाि।्
पष्पु मिु फलमहो नवदधेजि-सनुप्त-दािपुम-गाि-सम्पदा॥10-53॥
10-53. The same (omniscient) Madhwacharya, entreated by some people
(who had heard of his majesty) in a place called Pasupe, speedily enough
made the erstwhile barren trees sprout into flowers and fruits with the
affluence of his matchless musical magical enough to induce sweet sleep, to
their great surprise.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 167

धन्योऽमह्यि िानकिामनहि-हृद-्बाणस्समोऽजस्य रो
मध्वो ध्वस्त-दरागमोऽग्र्य-नहमग-ुश्रीाः काममारानम-हृि।्
नवष्णंुनवश्व-जर-प्रदंस नह िमि ्सव्ये ंस-ुसौख्यंमदुा
दाक्ष्याच्छ्री-धरमामरानद-नवरही रोगी सहृुि स् वद
य
ा॥10-54॥
10-54. Blessed indeed is Madhwacharya, devoid of desire, replete with
propitious qualities, dartlike to the hearts of the foes of Gods, equal in status
to Chaturmukha Brahma, refuter of rival doctrines, lustrous like the luminous
moon, magnanimous in mind, bowing with delight in all sacred places during
his pilgrimage, laying low before Lord Vishnu full of bliss, blessing the
virtuous with all prosperity, honoured everywhere by the public as a great
mystic eternally devoted to Lord Vishnu, derelict of distress and dear to the
deities.
इनि भवुि-नवभषूणस्य भरूा-ं स्यनवगनणिानि कृ िान्तरानण हन्त।
श्रवण-मिि-कीिि
य
र
ै
भीष्टंप्रनि-ददिीत्यमरााः प्र-कीिर
य नन्त॥10-55॥
10.55. Lo, even the Gods opine that to listen to, to meditate on and to recite
the countless miracles of Madhwacharya, an embellishment of the world,
fulfil the cherished desires of the devotees.
इनि नवनवध-गो-धारा-वारनै
वश
य
ारद-वानर-दो
हनर-पद-रिो नवद्या-नवद्यिु-्प्रदीनपि-नदङ-्मिु
ाः।
भव-भर-महा-घमोत्तप्तंसधनिप-मडिलं
सफल-समुिाः-सान्द्रािन्दंव्यधादनवपल्लवम॥्10-56॥
10-56. The discreet disciple of Poornaprajna and devotee of Lord Narayana
who lit the directions with the glow of his learning, cheered the virtuous direly
distressed with the dread of existence with his precious words that
highlighted the majestic glories of Madhwacharya that free the people from
all woes and favour them with knowledge, devotion and immense happiness
like a cloud blazing the sky with its flash of lightening and blossoming the
trees with flowers and fruits with its showers.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 168

इनि श्रीमत्कनव-कुल-निलक-नत्रनवक्रम-पनडििाचार-यसिु श्री-िारारण-पनडििाचार-यनवरनचिे
श्री-मध्व-नवजरे महा-काव्ये-आिन्दानङ्किे दशमाः सगाः
य
एकादशाः सग:
य - [11-77]
प्रचरुान्तर-प्रवचिंफनण-राि ्उप-शश्रुवुाि स् -सिकानद-मनुिाः।
गगिऽेल्प-दृष्ट-वपरुत्र जिाः
ै
त्वनरिंनिलीि-रुनचराप पदम॥्11-1॥
11-1. God Shesha (the serpent-Lord) followed by sages like Sanaka and
others, flooding the sky and with dazzle visible to the people of the earth for
a while to their surprise, listened to the discourses of the Acharya on
Brahmasutras and hied to his place, unseen. (On an enquiry into his unusual
phenomenon, during the second half of the month, Acharya apprised the
people who had assembled there that it was not moon-light but the lustre of
God Shesha.)
अनि-नचत्र-धानम्न निज-धानम्न रिंस-सहस्र-मस्तकमिन्तमममु।्
मिुरोऽनभ-वाद्य नविराभरणााः वरमन्वरञ्जुि िदाऽर्नय
ममम॥्11-2॥
11-2. (On their return) the sages Sanaka and others, decked with humility,
bowed with reverence to the lustrous thousand-hooded God-Shesha abiding
in his charming abode and asked him an exquisite question concerning the
merits of the excellent discourse (on Brahma-Sutra Bhashya).
भगवत्तमस्य नवफुल-प्रमिाःे समरंमिो-हर-िमंजगनि।
मनहिंभवनद्भरनप लोक-पिेपठिांमहुु
ाः फलमदुष्ये नि नकम॥्11-3॥
11-3. Oh ruler of the reptile-world! What good on earth does one get by the
repeated study of Poornaprajna’s delightful Shastra inclusive of BrahmaSutra Bhashya and others full of great glory when it is worshipped even by
the illustrious like you?
अनधकानरणांफलमलं नवदषांभवनि प्रवनृत्तरनि-वीर-यविी।
इनि िि-्फलंस-फल-सङ्कर्िो भगवाि प्र्-पञ्चरिुभनूर-दराः॥11-4॥
11-4. A study of the Shastra by the eligibles well-informed of its gains is
immensely fruitful; hence, O Venerable one, most merciful, and one who can
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 169

effectively expatiate, elucidate exhaustively the benefits of hearing and
meditating on Madhwa Siddhanta.
इनि िरु
ै
दीनरिमदुार-मनिाः वचिंनिशम्य स जगाद नगरम।्
शृणिुाऽदरणे महिीर-िमंमहिीर-पाद-समरस्य फलम॥्11-5॥
11-5. Endowed with knowledge sublime, the Lord of Snakes in response to
their earnest entreaty replied thus: ‘Listen with devotion, the advantages of
hearing and contemplating on his commanding Shastra of the most
worshipful Acharya’.
नत्रनदवानद लभ्मनप िास्य फलंकनर्िंकृषनेरवा पलाल-कुलम।्
स्व-फलं िुमनुक्त-पदमनुक्त-पदंशकु -शारदानद-परमार्-यनवदाम॥्11-6॥
11-6. Shuka, Saraswati and others endowed with spiritual learning delineate
eternal bliss as the supreme merit of a sincere study of Madhwa-Shastra
while celestial pleasures and material enjoyments are subsidiary as is the
husk to a cultivator, the corn being his chief capital.
परमागमार्-य
वर-शािनमदंभजिाममािव-कला-रनचिम।्
व्रजिामहो परम-वष्ण
ै
विांरिरेस्व-लोकमनजिो नदशनि॥11-7॥
11-7. The unconquerable Sri Hari favours with his world (Vaikunta) full of
eternal bliss to his virtuous dedicated devotees, serving him with a diligent
study of this exquisite doctrine, pregnant with meaning contained in the
excellent Vedas, Pancharatra etc., composed by the uncommon Acharya.
(Not an ordinary human being, the incarnation of Lord Vayu.)
ििुित्र नवश्व-नवभवैक-पदंप्रनि-भानि पणू -य
परुषस्य परुी।
उप-लभ्िेरदपमाि-पदंप्रनि-नबम्बमवे मनण-वप्र-गिम॥्11-8॥
11-8. In Vaikunta, the (unique) citadel of Lord Vishnu replete with auspicious
attributes, the bulwark (chief resort) of all prosperity, glistens with great
glamour. Its reflection in its jewelled ramparts alone can be its fitting
analogy.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 170

नसि-सौध-सन्तनि-रुचा स्फुनरिा पनरिोऽरुणाश्म-गहृ-पनि-रुनचाः।
इह मच्छरीर-वलरेलनसिांअिरुानि मनूिम
य
सरुास-ुहृिाः॥11-9॥
11-9. The row of rose-coloured mansions girt by the cluster of shining storied
palaces of luminous emeralds and diamonds resemble the image of the
ruby-coloured Lord Vishnu (the demon-destroyer) dazzling with the lustre of
the rising sun on (Shesha’s) luminous body glowing bright-white.
शबळा वळीक-घनटि-स्फनटक-द्यनुिनभहनरन्मनण य -मरी वळभी।
प्रनि-सद्म भानि रमिुा नमनळिा नसि-सौर-सैधव-परोनभनरव॥11-10॥
11-10. Every house that glistened with its white emerald roof reinforced with
the dazzling blue diamond at the ridge had the semblance of the Yamuna
River mixing with the white water of the Ganges.
रनद िाभवष्यनदह नवभ्रमिा-निरमो जिस्य निलरावनलष।ु
नवकटा नवटङ्क-कृ ि-पनत्र-िनिाः कृिकेत्यवक्ष्य
ै
ि कर्ञ्चि िो॥11-11॥
11-11. If the people in Vaikunta did not invariably (as a rule) suffer from
illusion, then they would never comprehend the charming images of the
birds in the several nests of the rows of houses as artificial; (they could verily
mistake them, to be real birds; such is the consummate art of the divine
sculptors).
नवनवधस्तलु ोपगि-नचत्र-पटी-स-ुनविाि-लनम्ब-मनण-दाम-गणाः।
शरणान्तरष्वे नधक-परूणिाः प्र-चकानस्त नवभ्रम इवावगळि॥्11-12॥
11-12. The bunches of gem-garlands fastened to the multi-coloured cloth
pieces, suspended from the beams flooded nay even out-poured, the
splendorous homes with strange resplendence.
नवमला-कृनिाः प्रकृनिरवे महा-मनण-हेम-मय्यनिल-वस्त-ुमरी।
इह साविे स् कल-कानन्त-रसाः कनर्िोऽनधकोनक्तनभरिाः कनवनभाः॥11-13॥
11-13. In this celestial city, Goddess Mahalakshmi of immaculate form, the
presiding deity of Primordial Matter, herself stands transformed in different
shapes and forms, priceless gems, gold and rest of the objects. Indeed, it is
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 171

no exaggeration if the divine bards overwhelmed with its extreme glory
portray its magnificence in grand-eloquent terms. (It is as real as reality
itself.)
िदिानद-काल-नमि-मनुक्त-रिाःे अगणय्य-शा-ुमिु -सङ्-ििाःे।
िगरम
ै
ह
य
ा-परुमसहं नि-मि ल् सनि प्रभोररमहो मनहमा॥11-14॥
11-14. Even though the towns are replete with liberated Brahmas and others
from times immemorial, so specious is this (strange) tract of this magnificent
Metropolis (Vaikunta) that it never suffers from congestion (they are never
full: no population explosion). Indeed greatly astounding is the divine
majesty of Lord Narayana.
भविंनवभानि भवुिक
ै-पिाःे भवुि-त्रराद्भि
ु-गणुानि-शनर।
वर-मनन्दर-प्रकर-मध्य-गिंनिज-मडिल-स्थ-शनशमडिल-वि॥्11-15॥
11-15. Amidst the cluster of such gorgeous palaces, glitters in all glory the
unique mansion of the chief Lord of all the worlds, ‘a miracle of rare device’
excelling outright the many many wonders in the three worlds like the disc of
the moon scintillating among the myriad twinkling stars.
स्वरनमनन्दरैव पनि-माि-करी गहृ-कम
य
रत्र कुरुिेसिुराम।्
अनप नकङ्करी-दश-शिी-मनहिा नश्ररमत्र वणर
य नि वश्ेमनि काः॥11-16॥
11-16. Who can depict in full, the majesty of this imposing mansion where
Goddess Mahalakshmi with thousands of servants waiting on her, attends
personally to her house-hold work and devotedly worships Lord Narayana?
(This brings out the supremacy of Sri Hari.)
कमला-पनिाः कमलराऽमलरा कमिीररा कमल-लोचिरा।
अमृिानह-राज-मृद-भोग-गिाः स्व-रिोऽनप ित्र रमिेपरमाः॥11-17॥
11-17. In this pleasure dome, Sri Hari the supreme, though pleased with his
own self, sports with his chaste and charming lotus-eyed consort
Mahalakshmi (for her delight), reclining on his cushion bed, the soft body of
the liberated serpent sovereign.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 172

िरुण-प्रभा-कर-सहस्र-रुचंकिकाम्बरंमनण-मराभरणम।्
हनसिाििन्दे मरनवन्द-दृशंिमरीन्द्र-धानरणमि-ुस्मरि॥11-18॥
11-18. (Oh Sanaka and other sages) remember ever, the lotus-eyed Lord
Narayana, holding the discus in his hand, commanding the lustre of a
thousand suns, robed in golden (yellow) garments, decked with ornaments
in-laid with variegated diamonds, with his moon-like radiant face charming
with its pleasant smile.
गणरदे ्रमाऽस्य ि गणुािनिलाि च् िरुाििश्चिरुवागनप िो।
ि वरंसहस्र-वदिा अनप िाि अ् परोनदिािनि-वदमे पिु
ाः॥11-19॥
11-19. The serpent-Lord continues: ‘Even Goddess Mahalakshmi cannot
reckon the attributes of Lord Narayana in their entirety, neither
Chaturmukha-Brahma eloquent in speech, nor myself gifted with a thousand
mouths (hoods) but nevertheless can narrate more emphatically the same
qualities delineated by Sages (like Shuka and others).
नवधरो नवहङ्ग-पिरोऽगनणिा रमणीरिुाश्च फनणपन्द्रे -मिााः ु ।
पर-रोग-भनूर-सिु -भोग-नमिा अवलोक्य िंदधनि मोद-रसम॥्11-20॥
11-20. Countless Brahmas, Garudas (Guardian of Birds), Sheshas
(Sovereigns of snakes), Indras (God of Gods) and others along with their
queens discern Lord Narayana (with deep devotion) and experience the joy
born of divine contemplation and taste the essence of bliss eternal.
स-चिभुज
य
ु ा विज-पत्र-दृशो वर-वनेषणोऽत्र स-नपशङ्ग-पटााः।
अरुण-प्रभाश्च िरुणाभ्र-रुचो नवचरनन्त िार्-रुचराः परुुषााः॥11-21॥
11-21. Such of the released souls who have secured salvation of Sarupya
type sport in the vast ground of in this celestial city (Vaikunta), endowed with
four arms, lotus (lovely) eyes, dark-blue hue like that of a new-born cloud,
decked with fascinating ornaments and donned in rich (yellow) raiments
glistening with the glory of the rising Sun. (They attain some similarity, albeit,
never identity with Lord Narayana.)
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 173

भगवि-्समीपमपु-रािविांप्रमदो ि केवलमलब्ध-िलु
ाः।
अनप िस्य लोकमनि-लोक-गणु ंभजिांस-ुदल
य
भमभनूर-शभु
ाः
ै॥11-22॥
11-22. The felicity of those enfranchised souls who attain the proximity of the
Lord (Samipya type of Mukti) alone, is not unique (unparalleled); the
beatitude in Vaikunta transcending the bliss attainable in Satya-Loka,
inaccessible to the less meritorious, is entire (full) but varies in extent with
the fitness of the liberated souls who attain Sarupya, Samipya, Salokya and
Sayujjya (types of liberation).
ि भवनन्त रत्र मृनि-जन्म-जरााः नत्रनवधंभरंनकमिु दाःि-गणाः।
अपरंच नकनञ्चदशभुंि भविे ि् गणुानद िि-्प्रभव-मलू मनप॥11-23॥
11-23. When birth, death and old age or the triple terrors (Adhyatmika,
Adhibhoutika, Adhidhaivika) find no place in this world of Vishnu, then of
what avail are the chain of other sorrows? (They also matter not.) Neither
any other blemishes (inauspicious qualities) like jealously, nor the qualities
of Sattva, Rajas, Tamas - the root cause of remorse dare soil its sanctity. (It
is a supreme Loka (world) full of joy and shorn of sorrows.)
अि-ुभरूिेसिु मिन्त-सिाः
ै
सकलर
ै
लं-मनि-पदंसििम।्
अनप िारिम्य-सनहिैाः स्व-गरुु-प्रवणाः
ै
परस्परमरुु-प्रणरैाः॥11-24॥
11-24. All the released souls who regard Lord Narayana as their unrelated
relative, (who bestows favours) take gradation for granted (do not question)
and abide in the world of Vishnu in fraternal cordiality (not jealous of each
other), with full devotion and respect (bear no malice) for their superiors,
ever enjoying divine bliss to satiety.
अनि-सन्दु रााः सरुभराः परुुषााः हनर-चन्दििे िव-चन्द्र-रुचा।
चल-चारु-चामर-धराि-ुचरा नवहरनन्त नित्य-िरुणा इह ि॥े 11-25॥
11-25. These freed souls ever young, handsome, smelling sweet being
smeared with red sandal paste, sport at will in Vaikunta fanned by
attendants with charming chouries.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 174

स-नवलास-लास्य-पनरिष्टु-दृशो मृद-गीि-वाद्य-मनुदि-श्रवणााः।
अि-ुरञ्जरनन्त िव-कञ्ज-दृशो रमणा अमी स्व-रमणीस्तरुणीाः॥11-26॥
11-26. (In Vaikunta), the ever-green (young) husbands with their eyes
feasting on the fascinating dances full of sportive (bodily) gestures and their
ears bewitched with the dulcet songs and magical harmony of the musical
instruments, sympathetically entertain their lotus-eyed consorts.
पनरणारकािपु-विानभ-मिु ाि अ् िुनिस्सरनन्त हनरणी-िरिााः।
नवमलाद ्नवमाि-वलराच्छिकैाः शनश-मडिलानदव रुचो रुनचरााः॥11-27॥
11-27. The lovely ladies having charming deer-like eyes come out of their
clean cluster of celestial aeroplanes (vimanas) like the rays of the moon
moving out of its disc and slowly accompany their husbands on their way to
the supernal park.
अरुणाश्म-वण-य
ििवस्तिवाः शभु-हार-सनन्नभ-रुचोऽप्यपरााः।
हनरिील-िील-रुचरोऽत्र परााः प्रकटीभवनन्त नवनवधाभरणााः॥11-28॥
11-28. These winning women of slender frames that appear there,
embellished with varied ornaments are of captivating complexions, some red
like rubies, others white like the diamond necklace, while still others bear the
semblance of the blue-sapphires.
सनुचर-द्यिुीदध
य नय
ि सक्ष्मू -िरंस्वरमम्बरंच िलु नबभ्रनि रााः।
शकु -निाःस्विा ध्रवुनममा अपरााः स-ुपरो-धरा जल-धरावलराः॥11-29॥
11-29. These lovely ladies of lasting lustre (aged sixteen) donned in fine,
dainty costumes, with beautiful breasts and sweet-throated like parrots,
verily seem like another row of rain-bearing clouds, (yet at variance with their
fleeting flare, dissonant din and strange apparel. (A young lady sixteen years
of age is named Jaldharavali – Bhavprakashika.)
समिीि-नवर्द्ु
म-भवुांस-ुदृशांपद-पल्लवाग्र्य-िि-रक्त-रुचीाः।
पर-भागिाः स्फनटक-कुनट्टम-भाः
ूप्रकटीकरोनि ि परुा प्रकटााः॥11-30॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 175

11-30. The red gleam of the glistening nails of the tender feet of the damsels
with bewitching glances, (that pass unnoticed) while tripping the ruby
pavement, is thrown in bold relief (become manifest) while crossing the
white-hued (variegated) crystal floor.
हनरणी-दृशांनि-वसिानि बहृ ि-्स-ुनििम्ब-नबम्ब-रुनचरोरु-रुचा।
शबळ-द्यिुीनि मदिस्य जग-ज्जर-वज
ै
रन्त्य इनि निनश्चिमु
ाः॥11-31॥
11-31. We take for granted that the pleasant glow of the lovely hip-region of
the deer-eyed bevy of beauties mingled with the multi-colours of their (rich)
clothings looked like unfurled victory-banners of the God of Love
vanquishing the world of lovers. (Disarming the admirers.)
कर-पल्लवस्त
ै
रनळिल
ै यनलिाः
ै
असकृि क्व् णि-्किक-कङ्कणैाः।
िव-रोम-रानज-वनल-वल्ग-ुमृद-प्र-ििदूरर
ैनि-मिाक्िरळ
ै
ाः॥11-32॥
(Verse 32-35 to be read together, as they form an antya-Kulaka)
11-32. These women, that have soft, active (moving) charming (sprout-like)
hands adorned with golden bangles twinkling time and again and slender,
tender bellies looking pretty with their three fine folds and budding lines of
hair that moved lightly (with their pretty movements).
कुच-कुा-पणू -य
िर-कानन्त-सधुा-रस-शषे-नबन्द-नवसर-च्छनवनभाः।
वर-हार-रानजनभरुिाि-ुपदंपनर-लोनठिानभरशिैरुरनस॥11-33॥
11-33. That possess precious pearl-necklaces freely undulating on their
bosoms at every step, that seemed like shining nectarine drops dripping
from their over-full lustrous protuberant breasts.
अनप लीलरा कुवलरोल्लनसिाः
ै
अपराः
ै
कराः
ै
सहचरी-निनहिैाः।
वदिाः
ै
शनुच-नस्मि-कटाक्ष-रसैाः चल-कु
डिलोल्लनसि-गडि-रगु
ाः
ै॥11-34॥
11-34. With their right hands glistening lily-blue picked for jest and the left
hands stretched over the shoulders of their companions with their charming
cheeks decked with pendant ear-rings and their faces adorned with gentle
smiles and enchanting side-glances.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 176

प्रगिासुिासुरनणि
ै
रशिामनण-िपूरुनै
रव परुा गनदिााः।
अि-ुवीनक्षिंुिि-ुनवलासनममंिरुणा भवन्त्यर् निवत्तृ -मिु ााः॥11-35॥
11-35. Alighted from their celestial chariots and jaunted ahead while their
sprightly (young) consorts turn back their faces as if beckoned by the
sportive movements of the bodies of their wives that bear jingling girdles and
jewelled anklets.
अि-ुपानलिााः स्वदनरिद
ैनय
रिााः कर्मप्प्प्यपुत्ये कुच-भार-ििााः।
शिक
ै
ाः पिुस्तदवलम्ब-बलाि न्कल िा नवशनन्त परमोप-विम॥्11-36॥
11-36. These beloveds bent by their heavy breasts and (hence) moving with
a slow gait somehow approach their awaiting sweet-hearts who have moved
ahead and with their help (hand-in-hand) slowly enter the angelic bowers.
हनसि-प्रसिू-निकरोरु-भर-प्रणमि-्सवुण-यमनण-सवि
य
रि।्
उपगहूरन्नमिृ -नसध-ुसिाः पविो ि कस्य सिु मधे रनि॥11-37॥
11-37. Who will not feel more happy with the wind, the ally of the two nectaroceans (Ara and Nya in Brahma Loka), embracing the golden and jewelled
trees bent with the burden of rows of fully-bloomed flowers?
उपचारिन्दिनवन्दंद्यवुिंनिरमिे िन्दरनि रन्न जिम।्
परमवे िन्दिमपुन्द्रे विंसकलंसदा रदनभिन्दरनि॥11-38॥
11-38. The garden in Indra-Loka though reckoned as Nandana-Vana is not
so in its primary sense (really) as it does not delight one and all as a rule
while the grove of Upendra (Narayana) in Vaikunta which invariably
exhilarates all its inmates (visitors) at all times, is the veritable supernal park
(Nandana-Vana) and hence surpasses it in splendour and excellence.
वर-पानरभर्द्क-स-ुकल्पिरु-व्रज-पानरजाि-हनर-चन्दि-वि।्
सनहिंसमानद-पद-िाििगाः
ै
पनरभषूरनन्त िदहो ऋिवाः॥11-39॥
11-39. It is the wonderful pleasure-haunt (strange-land) enjoying all the
seasons at all times, embellished with the excellent five kinds of heavenly
trees named Paribhadraka (Mandara), Kalpa-vriksha, Parijata,
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 177

Harichandana and Santana Vriksha adorned with seasonal flowers and
fruits.
नस्मि-माधवी-कुसमु-रम्य-िरौ िव-चम्पकानद-कुसमुोल्लनसिौ।
मध-ुमाधवौ मधपु-गीमध
य
रुौ मधनुजि-्नप्रराि प्र्मदमािरिाः॥11-40॥
11-40. In this retreat the Vasanta season comprising of the months of
Chaitra and Vaisakha, with its great charm of the full-blown flowers of the
Madhavi trees, decked by the fresh champaka and other fragrant flowers
and buzzing with the sweet hum of the bees, gladdens the dear devotees of
Sri Hari.
िव-मनल्लका-स्रजमभीष्ट-िमाः शनुच-सावांप्रणनरिी-नशरनस।
कलरि स्व् रंि कुशलेनि नकल प्रनिघट्टरत्यरु-कुचावरुसा॥11-41॥
11-41. In this merry mood, the devoted husband jocosely jesting ‘you cannot
do justice to it’, decently decks the head (the plait of hair) himself with a
wreath of fresh Jasmine flowers available (born) in the month of Jyesta and
Ashada. (Under this pretext, he closely clasps to his chest the bulging
breasts of his dear darling.)
मधरु-स्वरास्ति-पित्र-िनि-प्रकटान्त-पनि-धिृ -ित्रे-रुचाः।
नशनििोऽि-ुरानन्त नह सहस्र-दृशंजलदि-य
ुलक्ष्म-निज-ित्तृ महे॥11-42॥
11.42. The peacocks, gifted with a sonorous voice in the flush of their
dancing festivity, heralding the advent of Shravana and Bhadrapada with the
lines of circular dots seen in the tips of the cluster of the spread-out feathers,
resemble the thousand eyed Indra.
शरदोल्लसि-्कुवलरक्षे णरा नवकचारनवन्द-रुनचराििरा।
नप्रररा च शोभि-शकु -स्विरा रमिेजिो मिु र-हंसकरा॥11-43॥
11-43. The released souls elated with the luxury of autumn, revel with their
beloveds that have enchanting (blue water-lily like) eyes, fascinating (fullblown lotus-like) faces, parrot-like melodious throats and (decorated with)
jingling anklets.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 178

अनभिन्दरि न्हमऋिंुस-ुसिा स्फनटकाचल-च्छल-नहमानधकृिम।्
फनलिी-कुलंकुसमुरि न्शनशरो हसिीव पल्लु -िव-कुन्द-रुचा॥11-44॥
11-44. The coming of the cold (Shishir) season; that pleases its ally the
winter-season with the snow spread-out on all sides appearing like a hill clad
in white-crystal, blossoms the flowers in the thickets and looks as if laughing
with the brightness of the fresh-bloomed Kunda flowers.
नहम-शीि-वष-यपनरिाप-परुस्सर-दोष-मलू नमह ििग
य
ुणाः।
नप्ररमवे साधरनि नित्यमहो स नवमनुक्तमानिनि नवमनुक्तमिाम॥्11-45॥
11-45. It is verily surprising that all the (six) seasons, here (in Vishnu-loka)
inclusive of winter, cold, rainy season and summer that have attained
salvation being freed from their respective faults like snow, rain and heat,
render satisfaction to the emancipated souls.
अमृि-स्रगत्तुम-फल-प्रसवाि अ् मिृ ार ित्र जििाऽपर
य नि।
उप-भोक्तुमप्यनवनध-बध-वशा प्रकृनिंप्र-रानि सकलोऽनप सदा॥11-46॥
11-46. The enfranchised souls in Vaikunta, though not liable to any
commandments (laid down in Shrutis and Smritis), voluntarily offer with
intense devotion nectar, garlands, delicious fruits and flowers to the eternal
and independent Lord Narayana and then enjoy them (as they used to do in
mundane living); Oh, How hard it is to hide one’s nature. (People ever follow
their own nature.)
प्रमदानि-रके मपु-रािविा प्रमदा-गणिे चरिोपवि।े
उप-गीरिेस्म मधरुंमध-ुनजच्छनरिंस-कान्त-िनििा सििम॥्11-47॥
11-47. In this Vaikunta, the bevy of beauties sport with their beloveds in this
(luxuriant) garden in great delight and in an exultant mood (out of excessive
joy) sing in sonorous tunes the great glories of Lord Sri-Hari.
ललिा ललन्त्यनभवरंप्रवरा लनळिा लुिनन्त कुसमुानि परााः।
इिरााः स्रजो नव-रचरनन्त पिीि अ् ि-ुरञ्जरनन्त ि नह काश्चि िो॥11-48॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 179

(In Vishnu-loka) some lovely ladies dance before their consorts, while a few
other tender-bodied pick the flowers while still other (sweet-hearts) weave
garlands, thus all of them invariably entertain their lords.
वि-लीलरा नवनवधरा मनुदिााः िरुणा घिस्ति-ििास्तरुणीाः।
स-ुलिालरषे ुपनररभ् रनिंवदिारनवन्द-मधपुा दधनि॥11-49॥
11-49. The Adams (young men) delighted with diverse diversions, engage in
amorous amusements in the beautiful bowers embracing their (wives) bend
with their protuberant breasts, sucking the sweetness (honey) from their
lotus-like lips.
रनसकााः सधुािुसरसीष ुििो रुि-िपूरुािकुृि-सारनसकााः।
नवहरनन्त साकमवगाह्य धवैाः जल-मड्डकु ोत्सव-हसद-्वदिााः॥11-50॥
11-50.The park pastimes (games) being over, the impassioned women
copying the cranes with the jingle of their anklets, enter the lake containing
nectarine-water with their weds and with smiling faces indulge in festive
erotic frisks like ‘Jalmanduka’ – splashing water with their hands.
नवनवधा नवधार नवहृिीाः सनललेनवकटेष ुनवर्द्ु
म-िटेष ुगिााः।
सरुनभंसवुणम
य
र् वणक
य
मादधिेसिी-कर-गिंमनहळााः॥11-51॥
11-51. Satiated with their varied water-gambols, the lovely ladies stand on
the broad coral shores (full of trees bearing reddish precious gems) and take
the fragrant unguents from the palms of their friends (to paste on their
bodies).
जघिाशं कु
ै
रवरवाभरणाः
ै
कुच-कुङ्कुमश्च
ै
कच-माल्य-वरैाः।
िरिाञ्जिैरनप नमर्ोऽब्ज-दृशांघनटिर
ै
लङ्कृनिरलं नक्ररि॥े 11-52॥
11-52. The mutual co-ordination, between the loins of the beautiful lotuseyed women and their costumes, their various limbs and their varied
embellishments, their breasts and their saffron, their plaits and their wreath,
their eyes and the collyrium, is enticing enough to enhance their excellence
(charm).
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 180

ििमुध्यमा निज-गहृ ानण गिााः सममात्मिामस-ुसमैरसमैाः।
अमिृ ंनपबन्त्यसलुभंभनवनभाः चषक
ै
मह
य
ा-रजि-रत्-मरैाः॥11-53॥
11-53. Returning to their residences, the darlings with slender waists quaff
with their dear-ones, precious as their very life-breath yet superior to them,
ambrosia from golden goblets studded with gems, not available to the
mortals (Samsarins).
मृद-कम्र-शय्य-मिरुागविांमनण-मञ्चमनञ्चि-दृशोऽवसर।े
अनप चोनदिा अनध-रुहनन्त शिाः
ैनविरो नह भषूरनि सव-य
रसम॥्11-54॥
11-54. The damsels with decorated eyes leisurely mount the cushioned and
charming beds spread on the diamond cots of their loving lords at the proper
moment, prompted by their partners. Verily, modesty is an embellishment to
all sentiments (like Srinagara-love).
अनभकान्तमन्नुनमि-कान्त-कुचा नकल बर्ध्िी स-कुसमुांकबरीम।्
समुिु ी स-ुलक्ष्य-भजु -मलू -वनलाः पनर-रभ्िेप्रणनरिाऽनि-रसाि॥्11-55॥
11-55. A lovely lady facing her dear devoted is embraced by him in earnest
endearment lured by her elevated, enticing breasts while tying her braid
decked with flowers with the folds in her armpit distinctly discerned.
पर्ृ -ुवृत्त-िङ्गु-कनठिोरनसज-िर-वानरिारि-निजान्तररोाः।
भजुरोरग
य
ुिे रमणो रमणीं पनररभ् कोऽत्र रमरन्ने सिु ी॥11-56॥
11-56. Which gay husband in Vaikunta will not give happiness to his beloved
by hugging her closely with his two arms and broad chest impeded by her
pair of broad, round, solid and elevated breasts?
नस्मि-पल्लु मल्लु नसि-निनल्ल-लसि-्मनण-कु
डिलंमदृ-कटाक्ष-पट
ु
।
निभिृ ो निरीक्ष्य स-ुनचरंस-ुििोाः प्रनि-चम्बु नि नप्रर-िमो वदिम॥्11-57॥
11-57. The devoted lover discerning with a steady gaze, for a pretty long
time his darling’s delightful face blooming with a pleasant smile, her beaming
cheeks glistening with the diamond ear-rings, and her enchanting eyes with
their tender and smart side-glances, closely kisser her.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 181

ििमन्नुमय्य मिु -चन्द्रमसंपनररा-साृि-मदुा स-ुदृशाः।
उप-रम्यिेि िरुणिे नचरंमधरुाधरामिृ -रसंनपबिा॥11-58॥
11-58. The young lover, greatly gratified (full of joy) with un-interrupted
embrace of his beloved with bewitching eyes, lifting her face lowered down
with shame, drinks the nectarine essence of her sweet lower-lip (kisses her
again and again).
सरुिोत्सवोत्सकु िरा त्वररि करपल्लवं निवसिग्रहणे ् ।
कररुद्धमारिदृशाः सहसा त्वररत्यर् निगणु नमष्टिमाः॥11-59॥
11-59. Thus, the husband enamoured with intense pious passion, hastening
to disrobe his broad-eyed beloved with his winning (sprout-like) hands when
hampered by her, doubles his zeal. (Force)
रभसावपानिि-पर्ृ रूनसजाः पनर-रभ् िि-्क्षण-नवराि-िराः।
मनणिानद-सौरि-नविाि-पट
ू
रमरत्यमिू र् वुनि-सङ् उि॥11-60॥
11-60. The bevy of beauties, great adepts in the art of love indulging in
varied and long-drawn erotic sports, meek by nature but instantly grown
audacious, come down with their broad breasts and intensely embrace and
entertain their life-partners.
अनि-लौनककाि र्मरिो रमणाि र्मरन्त्यलौनकक-गणुा ललिााः।
अि-ुरप-रपमनि-लोक-सिु ंिदलौनककं निधवुिंलसनि॥11-61॥
11-61. The ladies in Vaikunta, dowered with exceptional qualities not to be
evinced in other worlds, gladden the equally strange lovers who greatly
gratify them. Their sexual enjoyment born of mutual acquiescence,
surpasses the merriments elsewhere (in other worlds) being exquisite (an
embellishment) in its excellence. (Bereft of blemishes)
ि रनिाः श्रमानद-िनचिा निरमाद ्नवरह-व्यर्ाऽनप ि वध-ूवररोाः।
प्रनिकानमिी-प्रणरिाः कलहो ि समनस्त दोष-रनहिेनह पद॥े 11-62॥
11-62. In this divine world (Vaikunta unconcerned with Prakrati, hence
faultless) divorced from mundane defects, sexual sports naturally enough
are disassociated with sweat and free from fatigue; neither do the pair suffer
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 182

the pangs of separation nor are they contentious (pick quarrels with their
lords) or jealous of their co-wives.
सिु -सनंवदात्मक-िरा वपषुांसरुनभत्वमवे बनहरन्तरनप।
हनर-धानम्न दम्पनि-गणस्य ििो ििुमान्यिऽेनप मनुिनभाः सरुिम॥्11-63॥
11-63. In this divine world of Lord Narayana (Vaikunta) the forms (physical
frames) of the (married) couples being of the nature of knowledge and bliss
(aprakrita, free from imperfections) pure and glistening like gold, are redolent
(with aroma) from within and without; hence such sexual recreations are
lauded even by the great divines (like Brahma and others).
शृणिुाप्यलोक-नवषरंनवषरंसकलस्य मक्तु -निकरस्य दृशाम।्
वपनुरनन्दरापनिरमन्द-रसंििुसन्दु रंप्रकटरत्यनिशम॥्11-64॥
11-64. Lord Narayana, ever full, always distinctly manifests his exquisite
form (of the nature of knowledge and bliss) full of beauty and charm replete
with precious attributes like valour, to the denizens (released souls) of his
world (Vaikunta), unnoticed by others elsewhere (in other worlds).
Wherefore, list this, with deference.
मनण-रानज-रानजि-महा-मकुटं नशनि-कान्त-कुन्तळ-सहस्र-िरम।्
अनळकाद-य
चन्द्र-नवलसि-्निलकं श्रवणल्ले सन्मकर-कु
डिल-रकु॥् 11-65॥
11-65. This divine illustrious Form, wears a priceless crown dazzling with
rows of diamonds, glistening with sable, curly locks, bearing a scintillating
mark (half-moon-like) on his charming fore-head, with shark-like ear-rings
glittering in the ears.
पनर-पणू -य
चन्द्र-पनर-हानस-मिु ंजलजारिाक्षमरुणोष्ठ-पटुम।्
हनसिाव-लोक-लनलिर
ै
िलु
ाः
ै
अनभ-िन्दरि प्र्-णिमात्म-जिम॥्11-66॥
11-66. And with lustrous face as if mocking the full moon, with broad
enchanting (lotus-like) eyes and ruby-coloured lips and peerless sportive
look graced with a gentle smile, delighting his humble bowing devotees.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 183

िव-कम्ब-ुकडठमनहमाशं मुहो-मनहमोपलेन्द्र-वर-हार-धरम।्
रमणीर-रत्-गण-नवद्ध-लसद-्वलराङ्गल
ु
ीरक-वराङ्गद-वि॥्11-67॥
11-67. With his neck glowing like the new conch (marked with three lines)
wearing the Koustubha gem similar in dazzle to the Sun, the (priceless)
pearl necklace, the bracelet, armlet studded with variegated jewels and a
(sparkling) ring.
रनव-चक्र-रुक-्प्रकर-चक्र-करं नवध-ुनबम्ब-कम्बुमधरुाम्बरुुहम।्
ज्वलि-ज्वलद-्गदमदुार-धिाः
ुपर्ृ -ुवृत्त-हस्तमनि-िाम्र-िळम॥्11-68॥
11-68. Reveals his exquisite Form having (four) long and stout arms with
charming ruddy palms carrying the Sudarshana discus resplendent with the
lustre of a cluster of Suns, the Conch (Panchajanya) glistening white like the
disc of the Moon, the lovely Lotus and the Koumodaki mace flaring like fire
and the mighty (Sharanga) bow respectively.
वर-पीवरासं मनध-राजदरो-मनण-मडटपाग्र्य-नवलसि-्कमलम।्
स-जगद-्नि-सप्तक-ििदूरकं शभु-िानभ-कञ्ज-गि-कानळ-ििुम॥्11-69॥
11-69. With superior sturdy shoulders, an excelling luminous chest, the
jewelled niche for his radiant consort (Goddess Mahalakshmi) a slender
belly holding the fourteen worlds and an auspicious lotus-navel where
resides the bee, the Chaturmukha Brahma extolling the Lord.
अनिकान्त-कानञ्च-पद-कानञ्च-नमलि-्िपिीर-भङ्ग-रुनच-नपङ्ग-पटम।्
वर-हनस्त-हस्त-सदृशोरु-रगुंक्रम-वृत्त-चारु-िर-जङ्मिु॥11-70॥
11-70. Having an exceedingly charming waist robed in rich ornate, radiant
golden raiment, with a shining girdle, with a pair of thighs like the trunk of the
mighty elephant and with knees tapering round and charming.
वर-िपूरुंपरम-रुक-्प्रपदंिव-नवर्द्ु
म-द्यनुि-ििावनल-मि।्
अनर-वानरज-ध्वज-कळङ्क-लसि-्पद-पासं -ुपानवि-जगि-्नत्रिरम॥्11-71॥
11-71. Adorned with amiable anklets, with extremely effulgent (fore-part of
the) feet, with the rows of finger-nails glistening with the glow of new reddish
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 184

gems, sanctifying the three worlds with the sacred dust of his shining feet,
marked with discus, conch and ensign.
निनिलागमावगनमिर
ैनमिाः
ै
सिु -सनंवदानदनभरिन्त-गणु
ाः
ै।
प्रपदानद-कान्त-सकलावरवा-कृ निनभाः- सदैक्यवददोष-लवम॥्11-72॥
11-72. With his infinite exquisite qualities like knowledge and bliss (each
quality severally also infinite) known through the heap of sacred scriptures,
constituting his (Narayana’s) body from head to foot, with its unique
distinction of identity in the diverse limbs and the different avataras
(incarnations like Rama and Krishna), fully free from faults.
अनधकानरणांगणु-नवशषे-वशाद ्नि-पदाद्यिन्त-चरणान्त-िरा।
अनिभानसिंघि-गणुाप-घिैाः इिरैश्च ित्तदनचिै रुनचिैाः॥11-73॥
11-73. Visible in different lustrous forms constituted of the nature of
knowledge and bliss varying from two feet to feet myriad and the rest of the
charming limbs (like eyes and hands) varying in proportion to it, to the
eligible released souls (ranging from the human beings to Chaturmukha
Brahma) depending on their capabilities, devotion and service.
िव-भाि-ुभााः किक-कानन्त परंवर-हार-हानर-हनरिील-हनरि।्
शबळ-प्रभानद-नवनवध-द्यनुिमि स् िु -बोध-सौरभ स-ुरप-गणुम॥्11-74॥
11-74. Reveals different forms with different hues, each resplendent and of
the nature of knowledge and bliss and fragrance, one lustrous like the rising
Sun, and another glittering like gold, the third charming like the bright pearl
necklace, still another glistening like the blue sapphires and other radiant
forms of mixed and variegated colours. (Only those who avail themselves of
his grace can see His form.)
आश्चरर
य
त्ष्वे नधकं जगत्रर-ेऽप्याश्चरम
य
ाश्चरम
य
हो महुुमहु
य
ु
ाः।
सौन्दर-यसारैक-रसंरमा-पिाःे रपंिदािन्दरिीह मोनक्षणाः॥11-75॥
11-75. How unique is the splendorous and exceedingly beautiful (containing
the quint-essence of beauty) Form of Lord Narayana, the Wonder of
Wonders (hard to be obtained by those who do not have his grace) in the
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 185

three worlds, (the greatest wonder) the more surprising when started at
again and again as it appears always anew and exhilarates the enfranchised
souls in Vaikunta.
(The Supreme always manifests his splendorous form, everywhere in
Vaikunta, out of favour to the freed souls and their attention is always
focused on the divine form in all their activities. The emancipated ones are
the ‘gnostic’ beings, with super-abundant God-consciousness and whatever
they do is God-oriented. It should always and clearly be borne in mind that
their sports and pastimes are not an aberration from their divine path but
they are of the form of divine fulfilment. The amusements and merriments
are by the way with the grace of God. (They bear hardly any shadow of
semblance, with our adulterated earthly enjoyments marked with divine
dissent). If the Sadhakas who envision and contemplate on the names and
Forms of the Supreme Lord secure salvation then is it strange if the Siddhas
who see God face to face bask under his bounty of bliss in Vaikunta?)
इज्यिेरज्शीलाः
ै
स रज्ाः प्राज्-मध्येपराः प्रोच्यिऽेन्याः
ै।
गीरिेगरे-कीनिाः
य
स-ुगीिैाः नवध्यबद्धैाः सदाऽऽिन्द-सान्द्रैाः॥11-76॥
1-76. Some of the liberated souls by nature prone towards sacrifice worship
the Almighty known as Yagna with religious rituals (sacrifices); others
inclined to propagate, propound the Supremacy of Lord Narayana among
the learned freed souls; still others disposed towards musical adoration,
hymn the Olympian (the worthy recipient) with psalms of glory; albeit, none
of them subject to injunction) and inhibitions (like mortals), but out of sheer
ecstasy!
वक
ै
ु
डठेिेश्री-नवशषेा जिािामत्याश्चर
ंनचत्त-वाचामभनूमाः।
वक
ै
ु
डठेिेश्री-नव-शषेाज-िािा-मक्तु -श्लाघ्येरक्तु मिेादृशत्वम॥्11-77॥
11-77. Such prosperous glories of the denizens of Vaikunta, indeed, evoke
great wonder, hard for the mind or word to comprehend and describe.
(Beggars description)
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 186

Yet this land of the blessed, the abode of Lord Narayana adored by
Goddess Lakshmi, Chaturmukha Brahma, Garuda and Shesha and many
freed souls, richly deserves such surpassing excellence.
र-ंरंसिु ी कामरिऽेर्म
य
त्र सङ्कल्प-मात्राि स् कलोऽनप स स्याि।्
इत्यवे वदेा अनप वदेरनन्त मनुक्तं ििाः को नवभवानिरके ाः॥11-78॥
11-78. In this land of bliss (Vaikunta), really wishes are horses. Whatever the
liberated souls list in consonance with their capabilities, they find its fruition
forthwith without any effort (exertion). The Vedas too propagate thus. Can
there be any loftier objective (Supreme glory) than salvation?
महािन्द-िीर्स्य
य
रेभाष्य-भावंमिो-वानभरा-विर
य
न्तेस्व-शक्त्या।
सरुाद्या िारान्ता मकुुन्द-प्रसादाद ्इमंमोक्षमिे ेभजन्तेसदनेि॥11-79॥
11-79. The eligible souls ranging from the human to the divine (Brahma) who
repeatedly recite, contemplate and exhort, according to their own inherent
ability, on the import of the Bhashyas (healthy interpretation of BrahmaSutras) by Anandatirtha (the composer of the bliss-yielding Shastra) gain
eternal salvation with the grace of Lord Mukunda (the saviour of souls).
इनि श्रीमत्कनव-कुल-निलक-नत्रनवक्रम-पनडििाचार-यसिु श्री-िारारण-पनडििाचार-यनवरनचिे
श्री-मध्व-नवजरे महा-काव्ये-आिन्दानङ्किे एकादशाः सगाः
य
िादशाः सग य
: -[12-54]
अत्रािन्त-स्वान्त-वदेानन्त-नसहं ेमख्यु ा-व्याख्या-निस्विेजाृ माण।े
सद्योमाद्यद-्वानद-दन्तीन्द्र-भीमेभजे ेक्षोभो मानर-गोमार-ुरर्ू
ाः
ै॥12-1॥
12-1. When Poornaprajna, the celebrated Vedantic lion, meditating (what a
dedicated mind) on Lord Narayana flourished in great glory at Udupi,
discoursed with his resonant voice, dreadful to the overweening hostile
disputants resembling mighty elephants in rut, the host of Mayavadi jackals
quaked with fright.
सारूामी चोळ-ज-िीनप-परुोाः पाश्व
े
पापा मन्त्ररामासरुग्रााः ु ।
सासरूा भ-ूभषूणेवार-ुदवे ेमढूा रिद ्धािर
य
ाष्ट्रानन्तकेप्राक॥् 12-2॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 187

12-2. These sinful and relentless Mayavadins joined Padmatirtha, born in
Chola land and Pundarikapuri jealous of Madhwacharya (the incarnation of
Lord Vayu) adorning the earth and conferred together (to decide the future
course of action) like the silly allies of Duryodhana, in days of yore,
approaching him for consultation.
2. याां गुप्तपटलोिायाां बैिर्ीचक्रसङ्गि्। साङ्कयं पिन्र्येनायाां मिार्ायपमी असिाां गुरः॥
भार्प्रकान्शका. Acharya’s resonant voice chanting the Vedic hymns being in
consonance with the canons prescribed in the six auspicious subsidiaries.
सन्मात्सर
ं
बद्धम
ु
चूऽेशभुािांवाचाऽलोलंकोनप गांधारकस्य।
मध्येिषेांिीच-िीत्या समािो वाचालोऽलंकोऽनप गाधारकस्य॥12-3॥
12-3. One highly loquacious among the mustered Mayavadins, heinous and
crooked in conduct like Shakuni in Mahabharata spoke these words to
incense Padmatirtha, the main-stay of the sinful and to generate in him
lasting jealousy for the virtuous.
एकं ित्वंवनष्ट मारा-मरीरंवाक्याः
ै
प्राच्यर
ै
प्यवाच्यंनवधत्त।े
पवूाऽ
य
पवूाह
य
न्त दौघट्य
य -भषूा नचत्र-ं नचत्रंदशि
य
ाचार-यिीनिाः॥12-4॥
12-4. The doctrine of Adwaita (composed by Sankaracharya) an ancient and
strange one, propagating the theory that the world is illusion and Brahman
the only Reality, one without a second, indescribable even by the infinite
heap of Vedas, is indeed a strange miracle, having knottiness (inaccessibility
to any valid rationale) as its chief embellishment.
मत्याम
य
त्याम
य
त्य-यनवनिट-्परुोगंनवश्वंदृष्यंनवप्र-चडिाल-पवूम
य ।्
भदेापिेंभनेद मािैाः समािैाः साधीराः काः साधरिे ि्ामलब्ध्वा॥12-5॥
12-5. Who can confirm with conviction without taking recourse to the
doctrine of Sankaracharya, that this visible world consisting of Gods,
demons and human beings, inclusive of Brahmins and the out-castes,
ascertained by valid reasonings like Pratyaksha and vehemently confirmed
by equally strong Pramanas (like Satyam Bhida), is difference-less (and
unreal)?
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 188

सत्यंसत्यंव्यावहार
ंनवधत्तेसव
ं
मोहेसव-यनिवानय
हणी सा।
ज्ािेजािेदग्ध-वि-प्रिीिंपक्वेिनस्मस्तं प्त-लोहात्त-वावि
य ॥्12-6॥
12-6. The guidance given by S’s doctrine in positing the real world (as Truth
empirical) visible in our state of ignorance (foolishly believed to be real) and
then as a piece of burnt cloth at the dawn of knowledge (Parokshajnana)
and thereafter vanishing like water poured on red hot iron with mature
knowledge (with the realization of the ultimate Truth), has the competence to
sustain itself in all its stages.
ज्ानि-श्रष्ठे-श्रष्ठे-नवज्ानि-वग
े
िग
ै
ड
य
ुर-स्थेसाम्प्रिंिार्-भिूााः।
आक्रन्दंमेहन्त शृडवन्तुसोऽरंहा-हा मारा-वाद उत्सादमनेि॥12-7॥
12-7. At a time when the mighty learned Mayavadins including
Jnanishreshta have attained identity with Brahman (are no more) you all,
who are in the vanguard (our chieftains) listen to my out-cry. Alas! ‘This
remarkable Mayavada is on its last legs (facing ruin).’
भ्रष्टा भाट्टा ि प्रभा-कृि-्प्रभाऽभिू त्र्स्ता माहारानिकाद्याश्च रत्र।
दग
ं
मारा-वाद-सत्रंनदधक्षाः
ुिोपक्ष्ये ा िस्तत्व-वादानग्न-नजह्वा॥12-8॥
12-8. We should never ignore the flames of the blazing fire of
Madhwacharya’s formidable Tatwa-Vada which is out to burn the dense
forest of Mayavada where the Bhatta Mimasakas got themselves lost, the
lustre of Prabhakara Mimamsaka faded and the Bouddhas were frightened.
(Mayavada that excelled all these doctrines is now being put out of court.)
र-ंरंप्रापद ्भनूर-नचत्ताः प्रदशे ंिस्माि ि्स्मादागिरेन्तराराः।
प्रत्यज्ारी व्यक्तमारण
े
सोऽनप प्राप्नोि प्ाश
ं
ही वरंभाग्र-हीिााः॥12-9॥
12-9. Alas! How unfortunate we are to see the Honourable Padmatirtha in
our camp failing to carry out in action his open sacred oath, to hamper the
progress of Poornaprajna’s journey and to deter him in all the places he
entered, in all possible ways.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 189

प्रश्नाः पृष्टाः िडयिेििे ििूंरक्तु ांरनुक्तं वनक्त चासाविडयाम।्
वानद-व्रािंलज्जरन्ने ो नवशषेाद ्आक्षप्तेनेि श्ररूिेनकं िुकुमाः
य॥12-10॥
12-10. What is the future course of action (for us to pursue) when we learn
that the eminent Madhwacharya, who (instantly) refutes the varied queries
and puts the hostile disputants to shame, Mayavadins in particular and
provides spacious and irrefutable arguments?
प्राच्यंशािंरि स् -पादंिुलक्षंवाक्यिेक
ैेिाऽनक्षपद्धष-य
िीर्ाः
य।
इत्थंपािव
ैनय
णि
य ंशृडविाः प्राग र्ष्मु ाि प्र्ापद ्दूरमािंमिो म॥े 12-11॥
12-11. When I hearken to the profuse praise of the tourists and passers-by
that Poornaprajna refuted the age-old Adwaita doctrine substantiated in a lac
and quarter granthas (32 alphabets make a grantha) with a sole sentence, I
feel afflicted. Hence I am coming to you with a sore mind.
वदे-व्यासो न्वषे वदेो िुमिूो नदव्या मनूिर
य
स्य
य
सा स-ुनस्मिस्य।
िद-्र्द्ष्टृणांचनेि वाणी-कृपाणी ििूंमारा-पक्ष-मलू ं नछिनत्त॥12-12॥
12-12. Look at the exalted eulogy of the on-lookers, seeing the divine
(endowed with all auspicious attributes) form of the Acharya with its sweet
smile; ‘is he Lord Vedavyasa incarnate or Veda in human shape: It is
certainly a sword to cut at the very root of the Adwaita tree.’ (will help to
hasten its downfall).
अनक्लष्टंिि-्सत्रू-भाष्यंबलीरो-मािोपिेंका क्षनििस्त
य
र्ा चिे ।्
आस्माकााः केऽप्यवेमक्त्वु ानवलज्जााः लज्जा-नसधौ दस्सहेऽमज्जरन्नाः॥12-13॥
12-13. Our own adherent’s unblushing (irresponsible) statements Like
‘Madhwacharya’s Sutra-Bhashya is straight forward and based on sound
reasons: (It may be so. How can it affect us)’, plunge us in a sea of
intolerable shame.
िस्य व्याप्तैाः नशष्य-जालस्त
ै
ुगौणाः
ै
ससं ि-्नसधौ शङ्ख-चक्रानद-भृनद्भाः।
मा गह्यृ रेि न्वश्व-सत्त्वान्तरानण क्षमेाप्त्य
ै
िस्तत्र िीनिंनवधत्त॥12-14॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 190

12-14. (So), map out a strategy for our welfare whereby the disciples of
Madhwacharya diffused in all directions, endued with rich qualities (like
humility and honeyed-words), bearing on their bodies (Vaishnava) prints
(marks of conch and discus), will fail to captivate the minds of the people
(fish) collecting in throngs (sea). (People gathered in the assemblies were
fascinated by the disciples of the Acharya like the fish lured by the nets in
the ocean.)
गौणैस्तकै गौण-वाक्यानभ-गप्तु
ाः
ै
गौणीं बनुद्धंवदर
य
न्तेिणृ ांि।े
हंसािांिो वाग-्नवघािा-प्रवीणााः नसधंुभरूो-वानर-वषैनरवाब्दााः॥12-15॥
12-15. The disciples of Madhwacharya, adepts in hushing the eloquence of
our Sannyasins, out to propagate the attributeless Brahman are enlightening
the people (with discourses) on the infinite auspicious attributes of Brahman
with sound reasonings supported by Vedic sentences like the clouds
silencing the cry of the swans and pouring abundant water in the ocean.
बाहुल्यिे ह्यिे दक्त्वा िलु र्द्ाग ए्िेनवश्वंप्राप्नवुनन्त प्रकामम।्
अनस्मन्नस्मद-्दशि
य
ापार-कालेरिल्लोकापार-कालेलरापाः॥12-16॥
12-16. It behoves us not to be prolix in praise (which will heighten
Madhwacharya’s stature), at a time when our doctrine is on the decline and
the disciples of Madhwacharya are covering all regions unimpeded (at will)
like the water of the deluge spreading speedily all over the earth during the
dissolution of the world.
आ-कडरत्थ
े ंिस्य वाणीमर्ान्यो मािी िषेांमानििांनचत्त-वत्ते ा।
स्वािांचिेो िन्दरि म् न्द-चिेााः दृष्टामच्च्यु व
ै
ाच
य
माचष्ट कष्टाः॥12-17॥
12-17. Heeding such talks full of chagrin, another dolt then, by nature proud
who well discerned the minds of the overweening Padmatirtha and others,
spoke with vehemence these bold words to placate his people.
िजे ाः-शङ्का-मात्रिो रद ्नवलीिंनधग भ्ीरणांमािसंमाि-हीिम।्
एकान्तिे प्राप्त-िजे ो-नवलीिम स्थ् रेो रस्माद ्भानि हर
ै
ङ्गवीिम॥्12-18॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 191

12-18. Fie upon the faint-hearted, void of self-esteem, who feels frightened,
listening to the excellence of the rival Madhwa-disputants: Better the hard
butter which melts not, for certain without the fire in its close vicinity! (It
highlights the timidity of the Mayavadins who are enervated before actual
confrontation with the disciples of Madhwacharya.)
रषेांनवद्या शाङ्करी शङ्करी िो दवेादीिांबाध्यिांसाधरन्ती।
शौक्रीवालंलज्जरदे ्दवे-पज्यू ंिषेामषेांसनन्नधौ को नवषादाः॥12-19॥
12-19. Why dejection, when abide the learned like Padmatirtha with us who
possess the Adwaita lore propagated by Sankaracharya that yields delight to
us, which like the sorcery of Shukacharya, substantiating sublation even with
reference to Gods and others, which makes even Brishaspathyacharya to
blush?
रद्यिि
ैंकक
य
शग
ैौण-िक
ै
ाः रुद्धंसाध्यंिव
ै
भात्यस्तुिावि।्
षट्कम-यज्ैनदिव्य-मन्त्रौषधाढ्ाः
ै
एिग
ै
प्त
य
ुाि ि्ो नवजिेा नह कनश्चि॥्12-20॥
12-20. Even though it is hard to establish the Adwaita doctrine when
countered by the irrevocable logic, propounding Brahman with infinite
auspicious attributes, it matters little when there are stalwarts like
Padmatirtha, specialized in the six Karmas like Vashikaran and rich in potent
spells and medicaments to shield us. So no one can defeat us.
(The six karmas are Chalana, Vashikarana, Sthambhana, Vidweshana,
Ucchatana and Marana.)
रद्यप्यवेंि ह्यपुक्ष्यो े नवपक्षाः नकन्तुप्राप्तो िाधिुाऽऽक्रन्द-कालाः।
अप्यिन्द्व-स्वात्म-बोध-प्रिीिाः
ै
आचारर
ै
च्छ
य
ङ्क्यिेशङ्कराद्याः
ै॥12-21॥
12-21. Even then the rival doctrine need not be neglected since it has
embarrassed even our mighty Acharyas like Sankaracharya (who doubted
their strength to rebut it) famed for their firm faith in (Adwaita Siddhanta),
propagating the identity of Jiva and Brahman. Even now things are not
beyond repair. (The time is not out of joint.)
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 192

पारम्परण
े
ाऽगिंित्व-शािंहन्तोत्सन्नंििूििेत्ये दुीर।य
िषेांदोषा वणि
य ीरा नवदग्धाः
ै
सन्तोऽसन्तोवाऽनप मध्यस्थ-लोके॥12-22॥
12-22. We should lament before the people thus: ‘our age-old (Adwaita)
doctrine, our tradition is being demolished by the upstart (Madhwacharya)’
and the shrewd and artful amongst us should indulge in active antipropaganda and indicate the existing or imaginary defects of Madhwacharya
and his retinue, to (brain-wash) the indifferent minds.
स्वानभप्रारो ब्रह्मवि स्य् ादवाच्यो मारा-शक्त्या सव-यनिवाह
य -नसनद्धाः।
इत्थंिीत्या शाि-िीत्यवे बाध्याः सवो लोकाः स्वात्मिो राः पराः स्याि॥्12-23
12-23. We shall endeavour to substantiate our Adwaita Sastra in a way
conducive to us: ‘our Brahman defies description (is indescribable): our
Maya (missile) is competent to manage all matters (feats)’. Like-wise we
should play the game with our secret in-tact (undivulged) and defeat the
adverse defenders and achieve our aims with the aid of Maya-deceit. (Our
trump-card).
ग्राम-ेग्रामेवारि
य
ांमाििष
ै
ांपवू-ं
पवू
ं
साम-पवूरु
ै
पाराः
ै।
स-ंप्राप्तािांमाि-भङ्गार कार
ं
ग्रिाकषाद्य
य
द्युिर
ै
स्मधीराः
ै॥12-24॥
12-24. Let us repel the respect to be received by them (the propagators of
Madhwa-Siddhanta) before they reach the various villages by prescribed
methods like Sama and Bheda and when they enter (the villages) let our
people be prepared to defame them and wrest their precious possessions
too. (Same, Dana, Bheda and Danda are the four methods devised to
achieve goal.)
इत्याद्यिे ेकारम
य
ालोच्य कालेचक्रुवक्र
य
ाश्चनक्र-भक्त-प्रिीपम।्
रोग्रामिंुिऽेन्यर्ा स्याः
ुकर्ंवा दाःिोग्राभं स्यध-िानमस्र-नसधौ॥12-25॥
12-25. Considering thus, the crooked Mayavadins indulged in hostile
activities to oppose the Great Acharya, the devotee of the discus-bearer,
Lord Vishnu; otherwise (without deep-rooted hatred for Madhwacharya) how
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 193

do they deserved to be plunged in hell, dreadful like the ocean (containing
the water) of relentless grief?
व्रत्याकारंवासदुवे-निषंिेप्राज्-ंमन्यंपड
ुिरीकानभधािम।्
वाद-व्याजाक्षपे-कामााः कु-मन्त्राि च् क्रुरत्त
य ंरप्य-पीठालरऽेमी॥12-26॥
12-26. The few Mayavadins who collected at Udupi put up the pedant
Pundarikapuri, a Vishnu-detester in the garb of hermit, as a disputant
desirous of refuting the Acharya in controversy.
रिि न्सहं ंग्राम-नसहं ोऽशचुीच्छो हंसंकाको रिदवेक
ै-दृनष्टाः।
रिन्मारी भनूरमारस्तरक्षंुििद ्नविद-्वरम
य
ाह्वास्त मढू
ाः॥12-27॥
12-27. The foolish Pundarikapuri challenged Poornaprajna, the celebrated
among the wise for a controversy like a dog desirous of filth defying a lion, a
single-eyed crow challenging a swan and a cunning jackal daring a tiger.
अप्यल्पोऽसौ ि ह्यपुक्षे ाम्बभवूेलोलात्मवेादक्ष-पक्षाः पिङ्गाः।
मध्विेाहो दस्तरणे स्व-भावाि ि्जे ो-राजी-रानजििेानग्निवे॥12-28॥
12-28. The Acharya, by nature invincible did not ignore (defeated) the fickleminded, little with Pundarikapuri, sheltered under a less sound doctrine like a
blazing fire singeing even a tiny, wavering moth with weak wings.
मािम
ै
ान्य
य
भ
ै
ास
य
मािोऽसमािैाः आनक्षप्यि
ैंस्वंमिंसाधनरत्वा।
प्रीत्यै नवष्णोरुत्तम-प्रीनि-िीर्ो वदे-व्याख्यांवदे-वदेी चकार॥12-29॥
12-29. The eminent Anandatirtha, the authoritative interpreter of the Vedas
glistening with unique and venerable Pramanas (like Vedas and reasonings)
pulled up (Pundarikapuri) the disputant and established his doctrine and
engaged again in his learned discourses on the Vedas for the love of Lord
Vishnu.
आम्नारंरेपठेु
राम्नार-पवू
ं
प्राप्ता नवप्रास्तत्र कौिहूलेि।
परास
य ीिास्तावदाचार-य
वर
ं
प्रक्ष्ये ंप्रक्षे ाचं नक्ररऽेिके -सङ्ख्यााः॥12-30॥
12-30. There (at Udupi) assembled in large numbers, then (at the time of
Acharya’s sermon) in great curiosity Brahmins who had studied the Vedas in
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 194

the traditional (faultless) style, sitting round about him being delighted to see
the handsome Acharya, the excellent expositor of the shrutis.
उक्ताङ्गेभ्ाः कानदकाि व्य् ञ्जरन्तंिि-्िन्मात्रा-व्यञ्जिादौ प्रवीणम।्
निस्रोऽवस्थास्तद-्गणुभ
ै
ाव
य
रन्तंदवेा दृष्ट्वा ह्यस्मरि ्दवे-दवेम॥्12-31॥
12-31. The Gods, seeing Poornaprajna discoursing methodically (in a
manner prescribed by the Shastras) manifesting the words like ka, Kha
pronouncing them properly through the respective organs, dexterously
disclosing the Hraswa and Dheerga (short and long) sounds and bringing
about the states of Pasyanti, Madhyama and Vaikari with due contemplation
on the concerned deities, intensely remembered the God of Gods (Lord
Narayana) as (the Acharya closely resembled Him) the creator of the Gods
Brahma and others from the several parts of his body, skilled in producing
the five famous elements like the earth and fire with their relevant
characteristics like sound and touch and ordaining the three states of
origination, sustenance and dissolution by means of Satwa, Rajas and
Tamas.
आदौ ह्रित्विे वत्सािसुत्यृ ांमात्रा-पादौ विर
य
ि दृ्श्रमािाः।
कुवन्न
य
न्याश्चाग्र्य-रपा नववृत्तीाः गोनवन्दश्रीरास गोनवन्दभक्ताः॥12-32॥
12-32. The glamour of Acharya Madhwa, the staunch devotee of Lord
Narayana seen by the Gods while pronouncing the two parts of Maatra, the
short Vatsanuvritti to start with and then the other famous Vrittis (complex
formations) like Vatsanusarini Pakavati and Pipilika, glistened resembling
the glory of Lord Krishna when he accompanied the herd of calves tripping
with his tiny feet on the earth seen with delight by his mother, making the
Gopis oblivious of their duties by his delightful sports (pranks).
मङ्गल्याङ्ग-व्यक्त-भाव नत्र-लोकीं रङ्गारढा नवस्मरंप्रापरन्ती।
कृष्णवेान्या मान्य-नवन्यास-पादा रजे ेमाध्वी सस्वु रा वदे-वाणी॥12-33॥
12-33. Acharya’s resonant voice chanting the Vedic hymns in consonance
with the canons prescribed in the six auspicious subsidiaries, stunning the
three worlds with the excellence of swaras like Ekamatraka having Rk Pada
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 195

with proper pauses and charming accents like udatta, beamed like another
Droupadi with the singular grace of her limbs and a melodious voice, moving
to the marriage (Svayamvara) hall with her lovely feet and stately steps.
गााीराद्य
य
र
ै
क्त
य
ु मौदार-यकारैाः िािा-िाद-श्लाघ्यमच्चुारणंिि।्
शीक्षा-नशक्षा-लक्षणािांनह लक्ष्यंमान्यंमन्येधन्य-बद्धुरेिल्यु म॥्12-34॥
12-34. I consider Poornaprajna’s Vedic utterances unique (archetypes as it
were) endowed with solemnity born of his eminence, commendable on
account of its diverse pitches (Mandra and Uchha) low and high, serving as
exemplary Vedic utterances, in tune with Shiksha-Shastra.
काल्पीाः क्लप्तीव्यञ्ज
य
रि छ् ान्दसीश्च व्यक्तं शाब्दंशािमद्भु ाव्य भरू
ाः।
स व्याचख्यावक्तु -िैरुक्त-मागो ज्याराि ज्य् ोनिवने
दिांवदेनमत्थम॥्12-35॥
12-35. Madhwacharya, an expert in the science of Astrology expounded the
Vedas in consonance with the cannons laid down in Kalpa, manifesting the
rules of prosody, revealing the efficacy of grammar in clarifying the
meanings of different words, exhibiting the importance of Nirukta that brings
out the etymological interpretation of words.
(Thus Acharya’s pronunciations and interpretations of the Vedas were in
harmony with the canons of the Vedic Auxiliaries, Shadangas are
न्शक्षा, कल्प, व्याकिण, न्नरुि, ःतदस, ज्योन्िष)
श्रौिेव्याख्योच्चारणेचारुणी िेमादृग-्दहेी वणर
य
देस्य को ि।ु
वागीशािव
ै
ानय
ग्वहङ्गेन्द्र-जीवाः
ै
भरूाश्च
य
रव
ैनय
णि
य ेरेप्रणम्य॥12-36॥
12-36. How can a human being like me aptly describe the exquisite
exposition and expression of Vedic Scriptures extolled with great surprise
and reverence by the Presiding deities of speech, Saraswati, Garuda and
Brihaspati respectively?
छन्दस्सार्
ं
सार्म
य
त्रामिुत्थे ंप्रोक्तं श्रत्वु ा ब्राह्मणा ब्रह्मणवे।
सव
े
सौम्या नजष्ण-ुनजज्ासराऽमी प्राप्य प्रोचनश्चत्र ु -कारानभधािम॥्12-37॥
12-37. The mustered Brahmins intensely delighted to listen to the masterly
Vedic interpretation of Madhwacharya, who appeared like the four-faced
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 196

Brahma incarnate addressing the divine assembly, approached the rival
confutants Pundarikapuri, curious to know the outcome of the intellectual
fray.
प्राज्य-प्रज्ाः प्राज्यरा प्रज्रासौ हन्तावोचन्मन्त्र-वणानय
भधरेम।्
िि-्प्रत्यर्ी प्राथ्यि
य ेवक्तुमिेि प्र्ाज्ास्मानभाः श्रोिकुामभ
ै
व
य
ाश्चं ॥12-38॥
12-38. ‘This Poornaprajna gifted with profound learning elucidated the
meaning of the Vedas in an intelligible manner; oh, How Wonderful! We now
request you, his hostile disputant, to deliver your discourses.’ (On the Vedas
in a like manner)
इत्यक्तु स्तर
ै
षे नवस्तानर-बद्धु
ाःे प्राप्तंुसाम्यंसम्प्रवृत्तो दरात्मा।
हास्योऽत्राभदू ्वासदुवे-प्रभार्ी रिि प्वू
ं
पौडरको वासदुवेाः॥12-39॥
12-39. Thus entreated by the Brahmans (in the assembly), Pundarikapuri
with the profane ambition to attain the same status as that of Poornaprajna,
exposed himself to great ridicule like Vasudeva (grandson of Paundraka)
courting his collapse, in days of yore, with his wicked wish to gain similarity
with Lord Krishna.
आङादशे ादत्तरं रानद-शब्धंश्रत्वु ा िारत्ये क्तु वन्तंपदंिम।्
व्याख्या-लौल्यादि
ै
ररे ानद-सक्तू ेपथ्वृ ी-दवेा निन्दिीरम न्िनिन्दाः॥12-40॥
12-40. The Brahmins, who heard the words ‘Agnina Rayin contained in the
half Rk, in the first Sukta in Rigveda erroneously uttered ‘Agni Nara’,
censured (the grammarian) Pundarikapuri who deserved reproof. (For his
asinine blunder and sheer incompetence in such a prestigious controversy
with such a profound Vedic Scholar as the Great Acharya.)
शादूल
य
ाख्यांप्राप्य साानविाः प्राग ल् ोकेधिूो मानर-गोमाररुषेाः।
वानद-िीनप-ध्वनंसिंमध्व-नसहं ंप्राप्तो हीत्थंशब्द-शषेो बभवू॥12-41॥
12-41. This wise-acre Pundarikapuri, the Mayavadi Jackal erstwhile
venerated as Pundit Shardula (tiger) having approached the Vedantic Lion -
Madhwacharya, capable of controverting the contestant tigers (learned)
became crest-fallen and hushed into silence (with the superior eloquence of
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 197

Acharya) and became Pundarika only in name, forfeiting his title of honour.
(As narrated by Tikacharya in his commentary on Tatwodyota.)
कृ ष्णाभीष्टा शाि-नवस्पष्ट-सज्ं ा रा स्वीरा श्रीाः पानलिा सद-्निजिे ।
पद्माख्यासि-्सध
ै
विेाऽहृिांिांशश्रुावाग्र्यािन्द-िीर्ाख्य
य -पार्ाः
य॥12-42॥
12-42. The eminent Acharya heard of his sacred volumes, dear to Lord
Vedavyasa bearing the valued designation of Shastra (science), esteemed
by him as his wealth, well-guarded by (his disciple) the virtuous
Shankaracharya of the Likucha family, being pilfered by the malicious
Padmatirtha (with the silly notion that they would pull down the Acharya if
they deprived him of his books, his main-stay) like valiant Arjuna being
informed of the abduction of Droupadi, dear to Lord Krishna, famed in
Mahabharata, protected by the sage Dhoumya, prized by him as his asset,
by the felon Jayadratha.
िणू
ं
िीणाद
य
भ्र-मागोऽर् साराः
य
सम्प्राप्तोऽसौ गो-गणैभीषनरत्वा।
सरं म्यान्तरन्तृ
य -कामिे हास्यंसम्प्राप्त-श्रीनिनय
जि
य ंिंजहास॥12-43॥
12-43. Madhwacharya quickly traversed the long distance along with the
senior-ascetic and frightened Padmatirtha (at Pragavat village) by his wealth
of words and gained a glorious victory: Padmatirtha became a butt of ridicule
when on a moot-point he (surprisingly enough) recognized the Antaryami
(Principle) in contravention to his professed doctrine. (This resembles Arjuna
expeditiously moving with his mighty senior Bhimasena threatening
Jayadratha (tormented by pangs of love) with his sharp arrows and defeating
him (to his dismay and derision).
दष्टात्माऽसौ भर्द्मके ानकिंराः क्षप्तेंुहेिाः
ुसौख्यदाख्यंबभवू।
हरश
ं ोऽरंिंि चक्षाम भरू
ाः िोकेसन्नेसकू रंकेसरीव॥12-44॥
12-44. Madhwacharya, the incarnation of Lord Vayu departed (with a
determination) to punish mercilessly the vicious Padmatirtha who (was unfair
enough) to intrude on the lone and virtuous Shankaracharya and seize
abruptly his sacred volumes like a lion unable to excuse the pig that killed its
young one; (like Arjuna, the incarnation of Indra, resolving to slay Jayadratha
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 198

who was responsible for the murder of the single-handed young
Abhimanyu).
िस्य त्रासाि प्ष्ठृ िनस्तष्ठिोऽभिू क्ष् मेापक्षे ी रो जिाः प्राग न्जिोऽनप।
मध्यऽेन्यषेांगो-ििीस्ति-्प्ररक्तु ााः सोऽद्यनज्जष्णाः
ुपञ्च-षग
ैोनवशषेाः
ै॥12-45॥
12-45. Pundarikapuri, anxious to safeguard the reputation of Padmatirtha
formerly foiled who stood stealthily behind to shield him being scared by the
Acharya, was again vanquished by Poornaprajna, who retorted to his
reasonings advocated in the midst of his disciples and pin-pointed his
blemishes with five or six select sayings like Ashwatthama and others
already defeated, secretly standing in the rear to support Jayadratha who
was alarmed by Arjuna, being routed by him who answered their attack with
few (five or six) arrows.
नवष्णोभरू
य
ाः शोभरनद्भाः पदान्तंपारम्परण
े
रेम
य
ाणर
ै
वाराः
ै।
गो-व्रािस्त
ै ंदारनरत्वा न्यगह्णृ ाि क् ञ्जाख्यािंनसधपुंमध्व-पार्ाः
य॥12-46॥
12-46. Madhwacharya quoting sentences in succession that determine the
Swarupa (Form) of Sri Hari supported by irrefragable logic, silenced
Padmatirtha like Arjuna subduing Jayadratha with a spate of shafts
illumining the sky.
(At this critical juncture, the virtuous who had assembled there, exhorted the
Mayavadins thus:)
आस्तामास्तामषे वो नवश्व-मोषो र-ेरेमारा-वानद-चोरा र्द्विे ।
र्द्ष्टा-र्द्ष्टा निग्रहीिा ध्रवुंवाः प्राप्ताः कालो र्द्ाग ग् हुान्तंप्रवष्टेम
ु
॥्12-47॥
12-47. ‘Oh Mayavadi Bandits! Cry halt to your burglary of the world
(welcome the reality of the universe). Lo! The people who see you proceed
to capture you; take to your heels; the time is ripe for you to repair to your
den’.
िजे ो नविच्चक्र-चन्द्रस्य लीिंनवध्वस्ताऽलं वानद-िक्षत्र-लक्ष्मीाः।
नवश्व-व्याप्तंरि ि् ुिद्दीनप्त-मलू ं रष्मु ि-्प्रष्ठेंिनन्नरस्तंिमश्च॥12-48॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 199

12-48. The shine (mite) of the sapient moon stands screened; the effulgence
of the rival-stars is extinguished; even the ignorance (darkness), the root of
the radiance of your moon (wise) and the stars (hostile disputants) dear to
you and encompassing the world is destroyed. (So, rendered helpless
hesitate not to run to your haven of rest.)
पवूाश
य
ामा-परू-यनवश्व-प्रकाशी गो-सन्दोहैाः सप्त-नवद्याख्य-वाहाः।
रष्मु ानभाः नकं िनै
क्ष ददेीप्यिऽेसौ दवेाः साक्षाि स् व-यनवि-्सव-यदीपाः॥12-49॥
12-49. Have you not discerned the prodigy, Poornaprajna (Lord Vayu
incarnate), steeped in seven lores (four Vedas, Pancharatra, Ramayana and
Mahabharata) endowed with auspicious attributes like Krida (Sport), fulfilling
the longings of the divines, scintillating on the intellectual horizon to dispel
the darkness (ignorance), like the bright Sun with seven horses harnessed to
his chariot, glowing in the eastern direction, dazzling the world with his flood
of light.
सवाध
य
ारंब्रह्म-सज्ं ंनवहारो रम्याकारंशारदन्दे ीवराभम।्
सनन्नणीिंगड
ुरलंशब्द-भदेाः
ै
मध्वानदत्यंसनंश्रिंकोऽनपधत्त॥े 12-50॥
12-50. Who can cloak (defeat in disputation) the radiant Madhwacharya,
seeking his refuge in the lotus feet of Lord Vishnu, the resort of all, endowed
with a comely shape, lustrous blue in hue like the autumnal lotus positively
portrayed by Vedic depictions as full of propitious qualities? It is as vain an
attempt as trying to veil the Sun in the sky, the home of Shabda-Guna, the
haven of all, with its massive expanse and azure tint.
नवधावि-नवधावि त्वनरिमनत्र-वादासरुा
अदभ्र-नधषणानभधो िर-हनरनह
ि
जाज्वल्यि।े
स रनुक्त-ििराः
ै
िरम
ै
ि
य
ु र-मिू -य
दाःिाङ्कुराः
ै
नवदाररनि दारुण-प्रवचि-प्रणादोऽनप्रराि॥्12-51॥
12-51. Oh Ye, Mayavadi fiends, who reject outright Vedas which speak of
the Jiva, Ishwara and the world (that are a fiat accompli) as Atatwa-vedaka
(faked) beware! Poornaprajna the man-lion, blazing in all brightness will tear
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 200

asunder (completely rout) his adversaries with the sharp logic of his cutting
discourses emerging (flowing) through his leonine tongue like Lord
Narasimha lacerating his dogged enemy with is incisive nails; hence, flee
away, flee away, hurry up!
धत्तेरपाडरिन्तान्यनप भवुि-पिरेो हृदाऽप्यके -पक्षो
दक्षाःसद्भ्ोऽनिलेभ्ोऽप्यमिृ नमह ददौ केवलं रो ि मात्र।े
पनक्ष-श्रष्ठेोऽपराः सन्ननमि-मनि-पदोऽसम्पदेस्यादरंवो
मा दप
ं
मानर-सपा
य
भजि-भजि िास्ता गहुा र्द्ाग न्ि-नजह्वााः॥12-52॥
12-52. Ye, diabolical (double-tongued) Mayavadi snakes! Attention! (be on
guard) Another superior Garuda by name Poornaprajna who holds in his
(devoted) heart the myriad forms of Narayana, the lord of the Universe,
highly competent, staunch adherent of his supreme doctrine, disseminating
his learning profound to all the virtuous, is out to demolish your glory, (The
Acharya is greater than Garuda because he (Garuda) bears Lord Narayana
in one form alone on his two shoulders with his two wings and gives nectar
only to his mother Vinuta). Away with your vaunt: forthwith sneak in some
hill-holes!
वदे-व्रािा-सदुशि
य
ाः पनरलसि-्िकाख्य
य -शङ्ख-ध्वनिाः
नवभ्रानजष्ण-ुपरुाण-सहं नि-गदाः श्लोकौघ-शाङ्गानन्विाः य ।
सि-्सत्रूनेष्वनिहास-िन्दक-चणो मध्वाख्य-िारारणाः
प्राप्तो वो नि-नजघक्षृ रा र्द्वि हेमारानव-दवे-निषाः॥12-53॥
12-53. Ye, devotees of the doctrine of Mayavada, detesters of the divine
(Narayana), abscond instantly, since Lord Narayana, famed as Madhwa (in
panoply) with his Sudharshana discus in the form of Brahma-Tarka (that
decides the validity of things), his lustrous Kaumadaki mace in the form of
the cluster of Puranas (like Bhagawata), his Sharanga bow in the form of
versified Pancharatra, his arrows in the form of excellent Brahma-Sutras and
the Nandaka sword in the form of (Ramayana and Mahabharata) has arrived
on the scene wishing to crush you; Run away immediately (it is befitting that
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 201

Sri Madhwa being the first principle reflection of the Supreme Lord is called
Narayana. Tatwodyota includes the eulogy composed by the disciples of
Madhwa when the frustrated Mayavadis, routed by the Acharya, on their
request, retreated from the scene of controversy in spite and jealousy).
पलाराश्चं पलारध्वंत्वररा मानरदािवााः। सवज्हनर य रारानि िकागय म दरानरभिृ ।्- Bhavaprakashika quotes
these verses from the last Verses of Tatwodyota.
इनि-नि-गदनि मारा-वानद-नविेष-वषे े
शभु-जि-निकरेस्वारामिोऽस्माि प्र्रािाः।
न्यवसदमर-नधष्ण्येप्राग्र-वाटानभ-धािे
गरुु-मनिरनभ-िन्दि द्वेमािन्द-मनूिम
य ॥्12-54॥
12-54. The meritorious multitude, the abhorrers of the Mayavadis incarnate,
celebrated the triumphant glory of their master in this manner (with hymns of
praise). Madhwacharya moved from the Kavu Village and stayed for
Chaturmasya at a temple named Kodipadi, reverently bowing to the blissful
Lord Janardana.
इनि श्रीमत्कनव-कुल-निलक-नत्रनवक्रम-पनडििाचार-यसिु श्री-िारारण-पनडििाचार-यनवरनचिे
श्री-मध्व-नवजरे महा-काव्ये-आिन्दानङ्किे िादशाः सगाः
य
त्ररोदशाः सग य
: -[13-69]
पृर्ृ-दशि
य
मनुत्थंकृिार्
ं
पनृर्वी-भिृ -्प्रणनिंगहृ ीिवन्तम।्
निज-नशष्य-मदुऽेर् सह्यमाप्तंपरुुषाः कनश्चदपाररौ कदानचि॥्13-1॥
13-1. Pleased with the greetings of the ruler Jayasimha on his
accomplishment in the recovery of his stolen books, Poornaprajna moved to
the Sahya mountains for the delight of his disciples after the completion of
the Chaturmasya period where the king’s attendant approached him.
भगवानिह िाः स्व-नकङ्कराणांअनचरणे ाऽव्रजिादिग्रुहार।
इनि कार-यनचकीषर
य
ाऽऽर्र
य
ि त्व् ांिपृ इत्यभ्नधिष
ै
िंप्रणम्य॥13-2॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 202

13-2. Bowing down before the august Acharya, the retainer spoke thus: ‘our
ruler requests your revered self to repair to his realm early to bless your
followers and to enable him to execute his task (of returning your stolen
collections lying with a mediator).
अर् माघविीमपास्य काष्ठांव्रजिा प्रनै
धि-िजे सा प्रिीचीम।्
पनरशोधरिा स्व-पाद-सङ्गाि प्नृर्वीं प्राज्-नदवाकरणे रजे ॥े 13-3॥
13-3. Poornaprajna luminous with his majestic lustre, on his journey from
the eastern direction (connected with Indra) to the west, hallowed mother
earth by the touch of his holy feet like the dazzling sun grown pure brightwhite (moving from the east to the west) purifying the land with the radiance
of his beams.
अशभुािप-हार-मारी-जष्टुाि अ् धमार्द्ीनिव गोत्र-निम्नगौघैाः।
स-ुजिैस्तरसाऽनभ गम्यमािाः परम-स्नहेिरा क्रम-प्रसन्नैाः॥13-4॥
(Verses from 4 to 8 form an Antya-Kulaka)
13-4. Madhwacharya journeyed from place to place shunning the vicious
Mayavadins and others influenced by them, accompanied by the virtuous
gratified in course of time with ardent devotion and sincere service like the
ceaseless flow of the Ganges, eschewing the tiny hills and joined by the
mighty rivers rushing through the huge mountains growing gradually serene
(pellucid).
समुिाः-फल-शोनभिोऽत्र पसंुो िमरि ग्ोनभरिोकहानिवोच्चाि।्
अनप भङ्गमपुािरन्निम्राि दृ्ढ-भावादपरािवार-य
वीराः
य॥13-5॥
13-5. Like the unimpeded gush of the holy Ganges bending the plain tall
trees glistening with flowers and fruits and extirpating the deep-rooted
stubborn ones, the invincible Great Acharya marched ahead blessing the
noble-minded, enriched with qualities like knowledge and devotion who
surrendered to him and vanquishing the depraved and the resistant diehards.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 203

गमिोत्सव-नवनस्मिनै
िष
य
व्ये ो नवनवधज
ै
ाि
य
पदज
ै
ि
य
र
ै
जस्रम।्
पनरसृत्वर-कीिर
य
ानि-य
मक्त्यु
ै
परुुषदू
ै
र
य-भवुश्च गम्यमािाः॥13-6॥
13-6. The renowned Madhwacharya was revered by devotees from distant
lands seeking their release from the sorrows of Samsara and also
affectionately attended by the multitudes from the diverse regions, amazed
by the pomp of his peregrinations like the course of the famed Ganges
adored by the pious and hailed by the masses on its banks arrived from
remote places for its grandeur and purity.
अमरर
ै
मरािगुम
ै
ि
य
ुीन्द्राः
ै
अपरक्षे ानवषरश्च
ै
सव्ये मािाः।
हनर-पाद-सरोज-सङ्ग-सारो भवुिेपावि-पाविो निकामम॥्13-7॥
13-7. Madhwacharya, the holy of holies, was adored as a celebrity and
always served with ardent devotion even by celestials invisible to others
including the Gandharwas and the eminent sages because of his intimate
devotion to the feet of Lord Narayana, like the Ganges un-interruptedly
streaming forth, deified being sacrosanct, with its origin in the foot of Lord
Narayana and idolized by the saints and the plebeians.
अरमप्रनि-वारणाः प्रराणेपरमािन्द-स-ुिीर्-य
सनूर-राजाः।
नवबभावनि-वले मच्चु-रपाः सरु-नसधनूरव सन्ति-प्रवाहाः॥13-8॥
13-8. Madhwacharya the pre-eminent among the wise, the composer of the
bliss-yielding Shastra, with his majestic form toured triumphantly overcoming
all opponents like the torrential flow of the Ganges famed for its sanctity and
glory (to afford salvation to those who have a dip) rolling in all magnificence
unruffled by impediments.
समरिे गिोऽमहीरासऽसौ नवषरंस्ता-पदोप-सजि
य
ाख्यम।्
मदिानधपिाःे स-ुधाम धाम प्रनववशे ानिल-लोक-वन्दिीरम॥्13-9॥
13-9. A little while after, Madhwacharya reached a place called Kabenadu
and entered the Madaneshwara temple worthy of adoration by one and all,
containing the lustrous image of the Lord.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 204

क्षणदानमह िावदूनषवासं ंनवनहिाहमि
य
ु -रोग्र-रोगमिेम।्
गमिोद्यम-लक्ष्मणर
ै
जािि ग् मिारोद्यिमाशुनशष्य-सङ्ााः॥13-10॥
13-10. After the night-halt, when the disciples saw their master closing his
morning routine in the early hours of dawn, they could comprehend by his
activities his intention to proceed ahead on his journey.
परुिो नवसिृ ााः समानध-शद्ध्यु
ै
रिरस्तत्र पटीाः कषार-वषेााः।
सहसोदहरि स्व् -रोग्र-मर्द्ुा-रिु-दडिानदक-धारणोद्यमिे॥13-11॥
13-11. The ascetic-disciples of the Acharya instantly got ready for the
journey collecting their slender kit that included their sacred volumes, their
staff and water-bowl marked with saintly symbols and their saffron clothes
tied in front to curtain themselves for deep (undisturbed) meditation.
अव-धार
यनवशषेकानर-शङ्ख-प्रकटाङ्काि स् -ुनधरा गिार्द्
य-भावाि।्
लनसिा िळु सी-स्रगस्य कडठेहनर-निमाल्य
य
िरोनचिा न्यधानर॥13-12॥
13-12. An intelligent disciple of the Acharya, closely observing the holy
marks of tilak, discus and conch borne on his body gone dry (lest his action
may erase the signs), placed round his neck (in all devotion) the pious
remains of the charming Tulasi (basil) garland offered to the Lord, a privilege
and pleasure for a devotee.
रि-धीगरुु-चनक्र-मनूि-य
पणू
ं
रि-्निश्वास-वचा नवशोध्य पाणी।
गणु-कु
डिल-मनडििंनवमािंगणु-बधंकवचाविृ ंबभार॥13-13॥
13-13. A hermit-disciple of the Acharya carried on his head with cleansed
hands and controlled breath the sacred casket (in silence) containing the
discus-marked Shaligramas (pure-stones) wrapped in cloth, decked with soft
strings and tied over with a twisted rope.
स-कमडिलु-मडिलावलम्बंस्वरमवेालघ-ुपस्तु कानद-भारम।्
रवु-नशष्य-गणो ु -दधेि-रत्ाि ि् नह दाक्ष्यस्य समो गणुोऽपरोऽनस्त॥13-14॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 205

13-14. The energetic disciples of the Acharya themselves bore easily the
heavy load of the water-bowls, and the heap of bulky books: Indeed
competence is a crowning virtue.
अनि-सम्भ्रमिाः पनर-भ्रमन्त भर ं -दामािवलोनकिंनचरार।
अिरुोग-परंमहुु
ाः प्रमत्तंजहसिुिू
य
ि-नशष्यमत्र केनचि॥्13-15॥
13-15. When the retinue of the Acharya was ready to move, certain of his
disciples laughed in jest when they saw a novice-student in search of a
misplaced rope to be tied to a bundle of collections to be borne, feverishly
fluttering in fright hither and thither, repeatedly enquiring in anguish about it.
अर् िि-्क्षण-घनटिोरु-घडटा-घि-िाद-व्यपदशे िाः परणे ।
अनमि-प्रमनिाः प्रचोनदिोऽसौ इनि निरत्स
य
ुनिजषे ुनिजग
य
ाम॥13-16॥
13-16. To Poornaprajna, the solid gong of the massive bell struck at the
moment (by a devotee in the temple) when his retinue was ready to repair,
was an auspicious augury signifying the assent of Lord Madaneshwara. So
he heartily hied ahead.
धिृ मािप-वारणंवरडेरंव्रनि-राजंिमपुरप
य
ुरद
य
ुारम।्
उदरनन्मनहरोपनरष्ठ-पणू -यनिज-राज-नश्ररमाररावभिूाम॥्13-17॥
13-17. Madhwacharya, the exalted arch-saint with the exquisite white
umbrella held high over his head by his disciple, seemed splendid as if the
early rising sun waxing with the lustre of the full moon above him in the vault
of heaven, an impossible possibility, something never to be seen.
भवुि-त्रर-धानरणंमकुुन्दंदधदन्ताः स दधेगरुु
ाः स्वरंच।
अनप केिनचनदत्यदो ि नचत्रंििुस प्राण-पनिबभ
य
ार िंच॥13-18॥
13-18. It is no marvel that a disciple even carried the weighty Acharya (on
his shoulders with great adoration) who holds Lord Narayana the sustainer
of the three worlds in the sanctum of his heart when one realizes that it is the
Acharya himself (the incarnation of Mukhyaprana, being the Antaryamin in
his disciple) that bears the all-inclusive ponderous burden.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 206

रिरो गनृहणोऽर् वनण-य
मख्यु ााः श्रनुिगास्त्यक्त-निनषद्ध-काम्य-भावााः।
इह मनूि-य
धरा इव स्व-धमााः
य
शि सङ्ख्यााः शि-सङ्ख्यमन्वगच्छि॥्13-19॥
13-19. During his travel, eminent celibates, householders and ascetics in
hundreds with their fondness for the Vedic studies, derelict of all forbidden
fruit-yielding desires (activities) who accompanied the Acharya looked like
the embodiments of the approved religious orders set in motion.
पनरवार-जिा-ि माग-य
दाःिंप्ररराः
ुपरुूष-रत्मीक्ष्यमाणाः।
इनि िाद्भि
ु
मस्य नह प्ररानन्त स्मनृि-मात्राद ्भनविो भवापवगम
य ॥्13-20॥
13-20. It is no wonder that (the retinue of this distinguished personage who)
gazed on his glowing face, felt no fatigue in their long tours, when mere
recollection of the divine Acharya can release the worldly beings from the
bonds mundane life and secure salvation, the ultimate end of life. Indeed
Darshan (seeing) is more fruitful than smaran (remembrance).
मदिश्वे र-वल्लभ-प्रदशे ेप्रभमुारान्तमर्ाभ्पद्यि र्द्ाक।्
जरनसहं इमंि-ृनसहं वराः
य
शभु-धीाः स्ता-नवनशष्ट-नसहं -िामा॥13-21॥
13-21. Having heard of the arrival of the mighty Acharya in the precincts of
the Madaneshwara temple, Jayasimha alias Kalesimha, the renowned ruler,
hastily set out to welcome him (in all glory).
अविीर
य
परुव
ै
वाहिाि स्व् ाद ्अनप मागाद
य
पसार
य
सनै
िकाि स् ाः।
सह क
ै
श्चि भ-ूसरुर
ै
वाप्ताः नत्रजगि-्पज्यू -पदानन्तके ििाम॥13-22॥
13-22. Coming down from his carriage a little earlier than the arrival of the
Acharya adored in the three worlds, keeping his army at a distance, King
Jayasimha attended by a few Brahmins bowed down near his feet (in all
reverence).
पृनर्वी-पनििाऽि-ुगम्यमािो नविाराद ्भनक्त-रसार्द्
य-मािसिे।
अनचरणे स नवष्ण-ुमङ्गळस्य प्रररावारििोत्तमस्य पाश्वम
य ॥्13-23॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 207

13-23. Madhwacharya stepped into (came near) the magnificent
Vishnumangala temple followed by king Jayasimha in utmost humility and
intense devotion (mind moist with devotion).
िरदवे-नददृक्षरा समिेा उभर-ग्राम-जिा-जिााः परेच।
उपरान्तमिन्त-मािसंिंमहुुरक्ष
ै
न्त कुिहूलानब्ध-मग्नााः॥13-24॥
13-24. The people of the two villages named Vat and Samuvaya along with
those (from other villages) who had assembled there with desire to see king
Jayasimha gazed on the approaching Acharya and being overwhelmed by
curiosity (plunged into ocean of curiosity) gazed at him again and again.
परुिो मधरु-स्विव
ै
द
य नद्भाः स्वकृिााः कण-य
सिु ा मकुुन्द-गार्ााः।
धिृ पङ्कज-बीज-चक्र-नचिैाः कृ ि-ित्यृ श्च
ै
िरुनै
िष
य
व्ये माणम॥्13-25॥
(Verses 25 to 35 form an Adya Kulaka extolling the Great Acharya from
head to foot)
13-25. Those people saw: The great Acharya being served by deft people
bearing conch and discus marks on their arms and a lotus garland round
their necks dancing in the fore singing self-composed sweet devotional
songs (praising Lord Vishnu), pleasing to the ears.
कनलिाञ्जनलिा स्फुटाि-ुरािंजि-सम्बाध-सहिे भनूम-भत्रा।य
करुणानवषरंनचकीषण
य
ुा स्वंव्रजिा नकङ्करिामक
ै
िविे॥13-26॥
13-26. The Acharya accompanied by king Jayasimha without any reserve,
(like a common man) with folded hands moving with the multitude bearing
its jerks and jolts being pleased to accept unmasked his servitude, with an
ardent longing to earn his grace. (To be an object of his mercy)
इदनमत्थनमिीक्षणि
ै
र
य
ाणां अपनरच्छेद्य-मनहष्ठ-धाम-रपम।्
अनधकं धरणीमलं-नचकीष
ं
ुस्फटमध्यन्तनमव द्य-ुिार्मन्यम॥्13-27॥
13-27. Madhwacharya with his splendid lustrous form, whose identity could
not be definitely ascertained dazzled like another sun mounting the sky
greatly embellishing the earth.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 208

अशिैाः शिकैनरवाऽव्रजन्तंरवु-नसहं -प्रवर-प्रगल्भ-रािम।्
अनि-पाटल-पाद-पल्लवाभ्ांअविीं पावििामलं िरन्तम॥्13-28॥
13-28. The Great Acharya, moving with his dignified gait like that of a brave
young lion, though walking briskly seemed to the people as if proceeding
slowly, (so his followers did not feel the fatigue of the journey), sanctified the
whole earth with (the holy impress of) his lovely blessed feet.
िि-निनजि
य -पद्म-राग-रागंवर-कूम-य
प्रपदंनिगढू-गल्फु म।्
सरु-वर-य
कराग्र-सव्ये -जङ्ं निरदोदार-करोपमोरु-रग्
ुमम॥्13-29॥
13-29. Madhwacharya’s (body built in exact proportion) nails of the feet
excelled the redness of the ruby, his fore-foot resembled the shape of the
foremost tortoise, his ankles spherical and lovely, his knees worthy of being
worshipped by the Great Gods and his two solid thighs similar to the stout
trunk of an elephant.
शभु-शद्धु-नििम्ब-नबम्ब-राजि-्िव-कौशरे-नवशषे-बाह्य-विम।्
िि-ुकुनक्ष-गळानळकेष ुरिे ा-नत्रिरिे प्रकटेि शोभमािम॥्13-30॥
13-30. The great Acharya was robed in pure, radiant silken raiment round
his holy and handsome waist, with three folds on his tenuous belly, the neck
and the fore-head brightening his body.
मृद-सक्ष्मू -घिारुणानवकाच्छ-प्रकट-प्रावरणे िे भासमािम।्
अनि-ििूि-निग्म-भाि-ुभासंनिकरणे वे सवुण-य
सािमुन्तम॥्13-31॥
13-31. The (golden-hued) Acharya cloaked with the thick crimson shawl
made of soft, thin, pure wool appeared like the Meru Mountain with its
golden peaks glittering with the glamour of the group of rays of the early
rising sun.
पर्ृ वुक्षसमन्नुिासं नभनत्त गरुुवत्तृ ारिहृद्यबाहुदडिम।्
परमारुणपानणपल्लवान्ताः स्फुनरिोिध्व
य
जलाञ्चिानदमन्तम॥्13-32॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 209

13-32. Madhwacharya endowed with a broad chest, elevated and well-built
shoulders, stout, long, round charming arms and his lustrous palm shining
with upward-moving lines full of flag and conch marks.
पनर-पणू -य
शशाङ्क-नबम्ब-शङ्का-नवषरंप्राक्सहसाऽवलोकििे।
अकळङ्क-िरा परंनवनवक्तं वदिंनबभ्रिमच्छ-नवभ्रमानब्धम॥्13-33॥
13-33. Acharya’s countenance, flooded with (the ocean of) pure lustre could
at first sight be as well mistaken to be the orb of the full-moon, and only later
seen, shorn of its black spot - thus excelling the excellence of the moon.
(Demarcating it as something extraordinary).
अनिसन्दु र-मन्द-हास-राजि ्िव-कुन्दाभ-रदंशभुारुणोष्ठम।्
कमळारि-लोचिावलोक
ै
ाः अनप लोकाि स् कलाि प्र्-हषर
य
न्तम॥्13-34॥
13-34. Madhwacharya’s teethe glistening with his bewitching, pleasant smile
appeared like the fresh, charming-jasmine buds and his red beautiful lips
and the delightful look of his wide fascinating (lotus-like) eyes, pleased the
people at large.
अनि-भासरु-कण-यभानसि-श्री-िळु सी-गच्छु मिच्छु -कानन्त-गडिम।्
भवुि-त्रर-भत्यू भनूि-दािेचिरु-ेभ्रू-वर-नवभ्रमंस-ुमौनलम॥्13-35॥
13-35. Acharya’s exquisite ears glowed with a bunch of fresh Tulasi leaves,
his cheeks shone full bright and his elegant eyebrows with their playful
movement (capable of creating, sustaining and destroying the three worlds)
bestowed weal on the virtuous and woe on the wicked in all the three-worlds.
सकलावरवाि स्फ् ुटं नममािााः प्रनिमा-लक्षण-लक्षणार लक्ष्यम।्
चिरुा नवदधरुद
य ीर-गात्रंस स-ुलक्ष्म्यत्ये धिुा निगद्यिेिो॥13-36॥
13-36. Scholars well-versed in interpreting the auspicious marks of men,
who had measured the different parts of the body of the great Acharya
(unanimously) recommended his body (being surprised with its symmetry)
as a model to the artists engaged in preparing excellent images; much more
so, because he is endowed with the thirty-two physical excellences in all his
incarnations (not only in his embodiment as Madhwacharya).
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 210

अनि-लोल-दृशांसमीनक्षिंुस्वंजि-सम्बाध-भरिे दूर-भाजम।्
समदशर
य
दूध्वम
य ोरसोऽसौ दररैवोरु-जिौघ-मध्यगोनप॥13-37॥
13-37. The merciful Acharya in the midst of the thick throng, out of
consideration for those who yearned to see him but had segregated from the
crowd (stood at a distance) apprehensive of its push and thrusts, stood on
an elevated place that enabled them to discern his bust (upper part of his
body) at least.
स-नवकास-दृशांकृिाञ्जलीिांजिािािांपरमादरान्निािाम।्
वलरिे विृ ाः नप्ररंमरुाराःे प्रनववशे ाऽरििंप्रबह-यबोधाः॥13-38॥
13-38. Madhwacharya encircled by people adoring him with intense
devotion, with folded hands and full-blown eyes entered another temple by
name Vishnumangala dear to Lord Narayana.
नवनवध-प्रभ-ुमध्य-सनन्नषडणो िर-दवेिे समंस गढूदवेाः।
नवबभाविुु
रानिवोि
ु-मध्येसह मह्यास्तिरिे पणू -यनबम्बाः॥13-39॥
13-39. Seated in the midst of rulers of various regions along with king
Jayasimha, the great Acharya (lord Vayu concealed in human form) glowed
like the full-orbed moon shining in the midst of the twinkling stars along with
the planet Mangala (the son of earth).
अवदि स् कर्ांरर्ाङ्ग-पाणाःे भगवाि भ्ागविेभवाप-हन्त्रीम।्
अिकुूल-गणु-स्वरानद-भाजा निज-नशष्य-प्रवरणे वाच्यमाि॥े 13-40॥
13-40. The worshipful Acharya, while the Bhagawata Purana was being read
well by his eminent disciple Hrishikeshatirtha endowed with all covetable
gifts like dignified voice and sonority, expatiated on the saga of Lord Krishna
that puts an end to mundane existence.
कर्िंिददार-धर
ै-य
सारंमधरुंपष्कु ल-भाववि प्र्सन्नम।्
नवदषोऽनवदषोऽनप शृडविोऽलंव्यनधिाऽिन्द-रसाम्बधुौ निमग्नाि॥्13-41॥
13-41. Madhwacharya’s exquisite exposition of the Bhagawata Purana
marked with self-confidence, entirely meaningful and melodious (packed
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 211

with felicity of expressions and lucidity of ideas) overwhelmed the listeners
both learned and ignorant with intense joy. (Plunged them in the ocean of
delight.)
गमिासि-सङ्कर्ानद-लीलााः स्मनृि-मात्रणे भवापवग-यदात्रीाः।
कर्मप्यमरााः प्रपञ्चररेाः
ुििुमध्वस्य ि मादृशोऽल्प-बोधााः॥13-42॥
13-42. How can a little-wit like me dare describe the divine deeds of the
Great Acharya Madhwa (the incarnation of Lord Vayu) the firm devotee of
God, the incoming Brahma (the regulator of our very life-breath) which even
Gods (with the grace of Bharatidevi, Mahadeva and others) can relate only
to some extent? A mere recollection of his lila (playful exploits) including his
stately bearing, dignified yogic postures and delightful talks can set free the
eligible souls from the fetters of worldly existence and secure salvation.
स-ुिपाः-कनविानद-सद-्गणुािांनलकुचािांकुल-जोऽनङ्गरोन्वरािाम।्
अबवद ्गहु-िामको नवपनश्चि क् नव-वरोऽनिल-वानद-वन्दिीराः॥13-43॥
13-43. There lived a learned one Subramanya by name, an outstanding poet
and an unrivalled (respected by all) disputant, born in the Likucha family
belonging to the Angirasa gotra, famed for its excellences like austere
penance and poetic talent.
दनरिाऽस्य सिी गणुािरु पा नवनध-वीरण
े
महुुमिृय -प्रजाऽनप।
अभजद ्भवुि-प्रभूहरीशौ सिु-काम वसदुवे-सिू-ुभक्ता॥13-44॥
13-44. Subramanya was (fortunate in) having a devoted wife befitting his
virtues, a votary of Lord Krishna who unfortunately enough (by the decree of
destiny) having repeatedly lost her issues, began to serve Hari and Hara, the
Lords of the three worlds, with an intense desire to beget a son (gifted with a
long life).
परमश्वे ररोाः प्रसाद-रोगाि स् िु-रत्ंिदसदू सनूर-पत्ी।
पनरषि-्पद-पट्टिषे ुिाघो नवनवदेरस्य समाः परीक्षकाग्र्याः
ै॥13-45॥
13-45. In due course, the consort of the learned Subramanya with the divine
grace of Lord Narayana and Mahadeva, gave birth to a gifted a child whose
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 212

competence (talent) could not be adjudged by the council of the wise like a
priceless gem not fittingly evaluated by the gem-experts in the town (which
conceals its excellence even from them).
वदिन्दे मवक्ष्ये िन्दिस्य स्व-कुलोत्तारण-दक्ष-लक्षणस्य।
कृ ि-कृ त्य-िरा नक्ररााः प्रकुवि
य ्कनवराख्यदनचिांनत्र-नवक्रमाख्याम॥्13-46॥
13-46. The erudite Subramanya enraptured to see the beaming moon-like
face of his son, capable of redeeming his clan, considered himself blessed
and performed the religious rites related to child-birth and gave him an
appropriate name Trivikrama (expert in the Vedas, Vedanta and poetry).
कळ-भाषण एव सनूर-पोिाः कनवरासीदिवद्य-पद्य-वादी।
अव-भानि ििुप्रभा-प्रभावी भगवाि ब्लिरोऽनप निग्म-भािाः
ु॥13-47॥
13-47. The precious child of the wise Subramanya was a gifted poet and
even when he lisped he gave out flawless verses describing the glory of the
early rising Sun, shining with his innate lustre.
सकलाङ्ग-रिुावभाि-शािाः समरेप्राप्त उदार-पनक्ष-सव्ये ाः।
स ससज
य
पदध्व-गोपकृत्य
ैनलकुचाः काव्य-फलं रसानभ-रामम॥्13-48॥
13-48. Well-versed in all branches of Vedas including its auxiliaries (and so
specialized in Mayavada) as to command the respect of the then expert
exponents of the diverse doctrines, Trivikramapanditacharya (a worthy offspring of the Likucha family) composed a delightful poem called Ushaharana
full of poetic sentiments for the benefit of the virtuous like the Likucha tree
refreshing the wayfarers with its pleasant shade and covetable fruits.
प्रनि-पानदिमात्मिा रर्ार्
ं
पर्ृ -ुमारा-समरस्य दघनय
टत्वम।्
स्व-गरुौ पनर-हिम
य
ुक्षमऽेनप श्रिवास्तं ंस वरस्य-बोनधिोऽलम॥्13-49॥
13-49. Though his preceptor was incompetent to reconcile the inherent
incongruities indicated by the shrewd Trivikrama in the difficult and specious
Maya-Shastra, he (Trivikrama) reluctantly studied the Mayavada being
persistently advised by his comrades.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 213

भगवत्यनुदिेस-गो-नवलासेवट
ु-भावंत्यजनि नत्र-नवक्रमाख्य।े
अनप भाि-ुपरुस्सरााः समस्तााः प्र-रराः
ुकीट-मनण-प्रभवत्वमाश॥ु 13-50॥
13-50. Trivikrama coming of age, gaining proficiency in scriptures, soon
subdued the then living learned like Bhanu (Prabhakar-Puri) with the
wizardry of his words (elegance of speech) like the dwarf Vamana growing
into the gigantic Trivikrama (spanning the three worlds) dimming the dazzle
of the luminous Gods like the Sun and others and make them seem like fireflies before his splendorous form.
अनिदक्ष-मनिंसपाद-लक्षेसमरेमानर-जिस्य-रनुक्त-शरूम।्
मनहिंनह मही-िळेमनहम्ना जिको िन्दिमब्रवीदपाशं ॥ु 13-51॥
13-51. Subramanya in secrecy advised his son, a dexterous dialectician fully
accomplished (gifted with skilled talent) in the expansive Maya-Shastra
containing a lakh and a quarter granthas (32 alphabets constitute a grantha),
famed on the earth for eminence thus:
शृणुवाचनममांनवचानरिार्
ं
ि कलौ निगण
य
ु-भाविा सिु ार।
इनि गौण-नवमक्तु रेगणुाढ्ंभज दवेंवसदुवे-सिूमुवे॥13-52॥
13-52. Harken to my wise words born of careful consideration and meditate
on Lord Krishna rich in auspicious attributes to secure salvation (full of
knowledge and bliss, in Kali-yuga in particular). Contemplation on Brahman
as bereft of attributes is not beneficial.
इनि िाि-वचो निशम्य नकनञ्चि ि् रळात्मानप नवचार
य
शाि-सारम।्
परमवे स पारमारुरुक्षाः
ुनवगणुोपानस्तमपुाशृणोि प्रभ्े ाः॥13-53॥
13-53. Trivikrama slightly shaken in mind with the sound words of his father
and eager to wade through the sea of life after a searching scrutiny of the
quintessence of Vedanta listened to the (Adwaita) exponent’s reflections on
the attributeless Brahman.
निज-धम-य
रिो गनृह-प्रबहाः
य
कनल-कालाकुनलिान्तरोऽनप हन्त।
नििरांनिनशिात्मिा निसगाि
य
स्फ् ुटमालोचरनदत्यसौ कदानचि॥्13-54॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 214

13-54. It is gratifying that Trivikrama, a faithful follower of his religious order,
a leading house-holder with his mind distracted by the strength of the KaliAge, yet by nature intellectually acute, once clearly considered thus:
रनचिंििुसत्रूमत्र मािंनवदषा सत्यविी-सिुिे साक्षाि।्
अपरस्पर-सङ्गिानि भाष्या-डरनप सवानय
ण ि माििांव्रजरेाः
ु॥13-55॥
13-55. In deciding the true nature of things, the Brahmasutras composed by
Lord Vedavyasa (son of Satyavati) are verily the authentic text while the
twenty-one varied commentaries on it, disagreeing with each other can
never gain validity.
रनद िषे ुनिराग्रहान्तरााः स्माः स-ुघटं िोप-लभामहेनह नकनञ्चि।्
ि िर्ाऽनप परम्परोपरािंि पठामाः प्रणरिे शाङ्करीम॥्13-56॥
13-56. When considered with an unprejudiced mind, not even one amongst
them elicits the correct meaning of the Brahmasutras; even when illogical
and unpromising we study Sankara-Bhashya with reverence, only because it
is handed down to us in succession.
घटिोपनिषत्सुिाल्प-बद्धुेशफुटेत्यभ्पुगम्य नचन्तरामाः।
ि नवमनक्तमपैनि को ु ऽनप मक्त्वु ा समरोक्तामीह रमानममामपुानस्तम॥्13-57॥
13-57. Even with a consensus that an enquiry into the Upanishads for the
slow-witted is not easy enough, let us muse over that mode of meditation on
Brahman, prescribed in scriptures like Bharata, Pancharatra and
Brahmasutras, without which no one secures salvation.
नवििाः सिु -सनच्चदिरात्मा समपुास्यो नवनहिो नह ित्व-नवनद्भाः।
स च िावरवी निरप्यिेचदे ्द्यनुि-मात्रंच ि हीत्यदो रहस्यम॥्13-58॥
13-58. When the enlightened who have realised the truth advise to mediate
on the all-pervasive Brahman, full of knowledge and bliss, without an equal
or superior as propagated in authoritative texts like Vedas and if in variance
with it, it is advocated (as the Mayavadins do) that He is formless (without
hands and feet and without the attributes of knowledge and bliss), then his
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 215

Brahman will have to forego even his resplendence – (that will be the purport
and the secret of their doctrine).
रनद चदृेगपुास्यिऽेस्य रपंनिनमरत्विे नव-भानि पानरशष्ये ाि।्
फलमप्यर् मनुक्तरीदृशी स्याद ्इनि िो िव
ै नधिोत्यपुानस्तरषेा॥13-59॥
13-59. If Brahman contemplated upon is non-resplendent then on the basis
of what remains, He will reduce himself to pitchy darkness? He who
meditates on this (black) Brahman, will bear similar fruit (will be dammed in
dark hell).
अर् वदे-परुाण-भारिानि स्वरमालोच्य रर्ावबोधमत्र।
गणुवन्तमपुास्महेमकुुन्दंस्मनृि-धमाि
य
स्फ् ुटमा-चरन्त एव॥13-60॥
13-60. (Bidding farewell to Sankara-Bhashya as something uninviting) Let
us, faithfully follow our religious rites decreed in Manusmriti and the like and
with considered reflections on the scriptures including the Vedas, Bharata,
Puranas etc. and in keeping with our talents meditate on Lord Mukunda, (as
Saguna) the mine of auspicious attributes.
अव-धार
य
रदनेि कारम
य
ाराः
य
स नववके ादप-चक्रमेनव-धािमु।्
पनर-पणू -य
मिजे ग
य
त्सुकीनि
ं
पनर-पणूम
य
शृणोि ि् दा नव-शद्धुाम॥्13-61॥
13-61. With such profound recollections when Trivikramapanditacharya
conscientiously resolved to conduct a careful study of scriptures,
Poornaprajna’s chaste repute, that had diffused all over the world, reached
his ears.
नव-नहिनस्त नह िो जिोऽनिवाग्मी समरंकोऽनप परम्परोपरािम।्
नक्षप िंत्वमदुार-रनुक्त-शरूो ि परेित्र समर्ि
य
ांव्रजरेाः
ु॥13-62॥
13-62. ‘Since, (Poornaprajna) gifted with superb eloquence is overthrowing
our established doctrine handed down to us through the ages, you, who are
a past master in logic oust him, as none can squarely (has the capacity to)
face him in an intellectual encounter.’
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 216

िव वदे-िदीनवग
य
ाह्य भरू
ाः समरााोनधष ुकुवि
य ो नवहारम।्
िव-काव्य-रस-नप्ररस्य वाद-निरदन्द्रे प्रनि-वारणो ि जज्॥े 13-63॥
13-63. ‘O expert controversialist, a rival disputant is yet to be born on this
earth to excel you who are soaked in (the river of) Vedic learning, have
ransacked (sported in the sea) the sacred lore and are a darling of the
Muses. You are like an intoxicated elephant plunging in the river and
splashing the water in the sea.’
उप-रानह रशाः शशाङ्क-गौरं निज-रर्ूस्य भरंनिराकुरु त्वम।्
अधिुा नवनधिोप-पानदिंिंप्रनि-वानद-प्रनि-वारणंनिवार॥य 13-64॥
13-64. ‘Hence, avail of this splendid opportunity ordained by Fate and attain
celebrity as white as the moon by out-witting the hostile confutants
(Madhwacharya, the antagonist elephant) and dispel the ear that has fraught
us’; so requested his fellow Mayavadins.
इनि मानर-जििे ित्र-ित्र स्व-जित्विे स िावदथ्यम
य
ािाः।
अिकुूल-वचा मनहष्ठ-मािो मिसा सशं रमाप सशं र-नच्छि॥्13-65॥
13-65. Thus being entreated earnestly by his own brother-Mayavadins in
diverse places to vanquish the mighty Acharya, Trivikramacharya, with his
commanding self-esteem, (equipped with strong reasoning capable of
clipping the doubts of others) well-nigh complied with their plea, yet
entertaining strange misgivings in over-riding the opponent.
नशि-मध्व-वचाः-सृनण-प्ररोक्तॄि प्रुुषािषे नवषादरि क् वीभाः।
नवनवधोत्तर-धनूळ-पािििे प्रनिघिेानधमधराञ्चकार॥13-66॥
13-66. Trivikramapanditacharya, distressing the disciples of Madhwacharya,
who marshalled the acute reasoning of their master, blinded them by his
bewildering counter-replies like an inebriated elephant enraged by the
piercing goad, bespattering dust enough to cloud the vision of its
adversaries.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 217

क्षणदासुनवचक्षणाः स वीक्ष्य प्रचरु-प्रज्-मिोज्-शाि-सारम।्
अपरानवनधिाः प्रसाद-गभ
ंनवदधेनवस्मरमान्तरंमहान्तम॥्13-67॥
13-67. When the discreet Trivikramapanditacharya, during the midnight
hours, covertly (without being known by others) looked over the essence of
the Acharya’s Shastra he was greatly stunned and delighted by the profound
thoughts couched in superb expressions in his works (now in the custody of
his librarian-brother Shankaracharya).
नवनधिवाि व्य् वहृत्य स-ुदशि
य ंबहळ-बोधमवक्ष्ये स निश्चराि।्
अनप ि िस्य मिंसहसाऽऽददेििुनवमश्ृ र कृिी कुरुिऽेनिलम॥्13-68॥
13-68. Often seeing him and discussing and deliberating over debatable
topics, Trivikramacharya was thoroughly convinced that Poornaprajna’s
doctrine was profound and flawless; yet he did not venture to embrace it
forth-with. The judicious always act after a close investigation.
िंनवष्णमुङ्गल-गिंबहळ-प्रबोधंप्राप्याभ्वन्दि िाऽरगु-नवक्रमाराः
य।
आिन्द-दंस चिरुािि-हास-लक्ष्म्या ित्वंप्रवत्ते मुमरन्द्रे इवाब्ज-रोनिम॥्13-69
13-69. Trivikrama-Panditacharya approached Poornaprajna, then camping
at Vishnumangala temple and humbly bowed down to him, yielding delight
by the lustre of the pleasant smile of his beautiful face. He appeared like
Indra (King of Gods) coming near the lotus-born (Brahma) radiating pleasure
by the brilliance of the charming smile of his four beaming faces, to
understand the nature of the ultimate truth.
इनि श्रीमत्कनव-कुल-निलक-नत्रनवक्रम-पनडििाचार-यसिु श्री-िारारण-पनडििाचार-यनवरनचिे
श्री-मध्व-नवजरे महा-काव्ये-आिन्दानङ्किे त्ररोदशाः सगाः
य
चिदुशय
ाः सग:
य[14-55]
[This canto is a fine exposition of the Acharya’s ‘Sadachar Smriti’. It provides
a charming chart on the then prevalent Guru-Kula system.]
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 218

पनरवृढ-घि-सङ्ेराज-नसहं ोज-य
शक्त्या
त्यजनि-मनलि-भावंिीरस-त्वानन्नकामम।्
स्फुटमदुरनि िजे स्व्यज्ज्वु लेमध्व-भािौ
स-ुजि-जलज-कान्त्यै नवश्वमासीन्मिो-ज्म॥्14-1॥
14-1. While the flourishing Acharya scintillated among the luminous and
deeply delighted the righteous, everything appeared enchanting and the
chieftains of the two villages forsook their partiality towards Padmatirtha and
hostility towards Madhwacharya as they were alarmed to see their powerful
king Jayasimha devoted to him (Madhwacharya) like the radiant sun
blossoming the lotuses and the cluster of clouds parched with the dawn of
Kartika season.
कृ िमपकृिमाराः
ै
क्षम्यिांक्षानन्त-भषू
ाः
ै
इनि मदृ वदिांच प्रार्ि
य
ानभाः-प्रभणू ाम।्
अप-हृिमपरषेांमन्त्रिो ग्रि-जािं
दश-हृदर-निरोगादग्रहीच्छङ्कराराः
य॥14-2॥
14-2. King Jayasimha and other chiefs earnestly requested the Acharya thus
: ‘Oh honoured one, decked with bounty of forgiveness, condone the
mischief of the indiscreet’. At the behest of Poornaprajna, Shankara
Panditacharya took charge of his precious library pilfered by Padmatirtha
and other jealous opponents by crooked means.
पनर-वृिमव-िम्रग्र
ै
ाम
य णी-ग्राम्य-पवू
ाः
ै
अव-ििमरु-चिेाः-पाद-पाश्व
े
िनृसहं म।्
सहज-नवजरिोऽरगु-्नवक्रमाराः
य
प्रसन्नाः
कनव-कुल-निलकोऽसावानशषाऽिोषरत्तम॥्14-3॥
14-3. Trivikramacharya the star-poet pleased with the success of his brother
Shankara Panditacharya, blessed king Jayasimha to his great delight who
had seated himself near the lustrous feed of the divine Acharya encircled by
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 219

the prominent folk of the village including its chiefs and leading Brahmins.
(This verse speaks of his silent disapproval of the meanness of the theft of
Acharya’s rare collections.)
उप-चरनि नििान्तंहन्त पौरन्दरी धाः
ू
द्य-ुसदनस भजिो रंदल
य
भा दभ्र-भाग्रैाः।
नदशिुस परमाग्र्यािन्द-िीर्ानय
ि-रणे ाः
ु
धरनण-धर सिु ंिेसन्तिंस्वान्तरनेि॥14-4॥
14-4. Oh, pure-minded king Jayasimha, may the holy dust of the feet of the
saintly Acharya, un-attainable by the less meritorious, potent to raise the
virtuous that serve him to the rank of Indra and win great glory in the
assembly of Gods, grant you eternal felicity.
(This verse puts forth in a telling manner the greatness of the inherent
strength of the dust of the feet of the Acharya adored by him in other
contexts also.)
स्वस्सन्दु रीभजुलिापनरभणय ीधाःूपरैन्दरी भवनि रंभजिांभनुजष्या। आिन्दिीर्भय गवत्दपद्मरणे ाःुस्वािन्ददो भविुिेजरनसहं
भूपाः। (B) त्रलै ोक्याचारपय ादोज्वलजलजलसत्ासं वोस्माि प्िुन्त॥ु - वारस्तु नुि ॥ (c) पदपद्मजोदस्य ध्रंुमेदीरिानमनि –
समुि नवजर (D) रद्पादपद्मरजसा नशरसा धिृ िे सद्याः प्ररानन्त पनरशनद्धमशषेलोकााः। - ित्वप्रदीप॥
अिनि-पनरनचिस्याप्यस्य सोऽरंकवीन्द्रो
गणु-रसमनि-गढूंज्ािवानित्यनचत्रम।्
मधुमध-ुकर-राजो निष्पिि प्ौष्पमाप्तंु
ििुपनरचर-हीिाः काििऽेनप प्रभाः
ुस्याि॥्5॥
14-5. No wonder that Trivikramapanditacharya, the eminent among the wise,
though not so familiar till then with Madhwacharya, could well comprehend
the essence of the inmost secret of his divine qualities, like the king-bee
frisking in an unknown forest gifted with inherent competence to pick flowers
and suck honey.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 220

अनिल-िल-कुलािांवदर
य
ि ि्ेष-दोषं
नवदधदनप िराणांकौिकुं मध्यमािाम।्
स्व-गनि-समनुचिािांभनूि-दारी शभुािां
बहळ-हृनदह निन्येशवर
यीाः कानश्चदवेम॥्14-6॥
14-6. The magnanimous Acharya spent a few nights in the Vishnumangala
temple giving ample scope to the vicious (Tamoyogya) to enhance their fund
of spite, arousing the curiosity of the mundane (Nitya-Samsarins) by his
surprising successes and blessing the eligible virtuous (Muktiyogyas) with
wealth of wisdom and depth of devotion.
उदरनि नवििारा िन्दिेश्लाघ्य-काले
स कृ ि-सकल-कृ त्याः कृ त्य-वनेद-प्रवके ाः।
अरुण-रवनिकान्तब्रह्म िारारणाख्यं
गरुु-गणुमनभ-दध्यौ रोग्र-रोगासिस्थाः॥14-7॥
14-7. Madhwacharya, supreme among the rigorous observers of religious
rites, took his holy bath at the auspicious time of day-break (when Aruna, the
son of Vinata rises in the sky) and performed other relevant duties at the
appointed time, comfortably seated in yogic posture behind the red curtain
contemplating on Brahman, known as Lord Narayana, full of infinite
perfections.
अनि-धवनळि-दन्ता दन्त-काष्ठ्ैाः प्रशस्तैाः
अनप रगुपदिकेेसस्नरुत्र व्रिीन्द्रााः।
गरुुनभरनभ-नहिष्वे ाचार-भदेषे ुनिष्ठां
स्फुटमव-गमरन्ताः सौष्ठवाि क् मण
य
ांच॥14-8॥
14-8. Many famous ascetic disciples of the Acharya, with bright teeth being
brushed by the approved holy-sticks collectively took a dip in the pond,
unmistakably demonstrating their faith in the strict observance of the
prescribed religious discipline, as advised by their preceptors.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 221

(They were ideal students of an ideal teacher, serving to others as models to
copy. It brings to light the importance of strict adherence to good conduct.)
चरम-समर-सप्तुााः पवूम
य
त्थु ार नशष्यााः
गरुु-जि-पनर-चरा
ं
चनक्ररेदष्करांच।
स-बहु-मनि िदाद्यप्याऽध-य
रात्राि प्र्सन्नााः
स-ुगनिरपरर्ष
ै
ांस्याि क् र्ङ्कारनमष्टा॥14-9॥
14-9. The ideal students slept after their teacher relaxed and got up before
he woke up and so devoutly served him from dawn to mid-night and with
such reverence and delight, impossible for the less meritorious; otherwise
(bereft of such excellent preceptorial service) how could they attain their
cherished wisdom and gain salvation?
श्रवण-मिि-हेिोाः प्राक्नचरारास्त-निर्द्ाः
सपनद नववशरन्त्या निर्द्रा ग्रस्त-चिेााः।
स्वरमनप िरनि र्द्ागङ्ग-विानद पज्यू े
िनटनि नवगि-निर्द्ाः कोनप नशष्योऽन्वशिे॥14-10॥
14-10. A certain disciple who had kept late hours in the night engaged in
listening and thinking being unable to get up in the morning at the appointed
time to attend to his enjoined duties under the influence of sleep, abruptly
awoke only to repent seeing his revered teacher hastily gathering his kit.
(Clothes and other necessary articles)
नवनहिमनवनहिंप्रागवे कस्माद ्नव-निर्द्ैाः
इनि गरुु-पनरवादाशङ्करा िम्र-गात्रााः।
नचरमिविरन्ताः श्रावका मक्तु -मागााः
य
गरुुष-ुजल-सकाश-स्थषे ुिष्णू ीमनिष्ठि॥्14-11॥
14.11. Some pupils apprehensive of being chided by the preceptor for not
getting up early in the morning to attend to their assigned duties, stood aside
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 222

silent with their heads bent low without getting into the water, in the vicinity
of their teacher standing by the side of the lake.
नवपलु -हृदर-पाश्व
े
दीप-दीनप्त-प्रदीप्रे
दर-वर-पनरपणू व
ै
ानय
भरघ्य
य
ानद दत्वा।
रनिरनि-रि-चिेाश्चनक्रणोऽचा-यनिकाराि ्
कुसमु-सनमनिमग्र्यामादरादज्जहार॥14-12॥
14-12. An ascetic who had sternly subdued his mind offered oblation to God
with water filled in the excellent conch, in the vicinity of Poornaprajna
glistening in the light of the lamp and removed with great devotion the heap
of fragrant flowers from the cluster of Shalagramas and images of the
discus-wielder, Lord Vishnu.
अमृिमनप निरीक्ष्याऽस्रानव निमाल्य
य -सिू े
घृिनमदनमनि सद्यो भ्रानन्तमन्तोऽनप नशष्यााः।
श्रदधरुनधक-वाक्यनै
वभ्र
य
मास्तच्च पश्चाद ्
अिनुदिममिृ ान्नस्त
ै
स्य सवेस्य शक्त्या॥14-13॥
14-13. Even though the disciples evinced every day ambrosia oozing from
the flowers offered to the Shalagramas and images (at the time of Nirmalyavisarjana - removal of flowers) owing to the majesty of Madhwacharya
(devoutly served everyday by the Gods) they mistook it to be ghee, till their
superiors (more elderly) freed them from delusion and made them realise
(believe) on authoritative statements that it was nectar.
(This verse brings out the greatness of the Acharya and the glory of his
worship.)
अगमदनचि-मन्त्रस्त
ै
दूरािांत्रराणां
कृनिनभरि-ुमिात्मा ित्र पञ्चाङ्ग-नवनद्भाः।
उदरमनहम-रोनचश्चक्र-विी नत्र-शनक्ताः
दधदनि-बहृ दन्ताः षि-्गणु ंस्वात्म-िजे ाः॥14-14॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 223

(The verses 14 to 18 describe beautifully the Sun-rise, a special feature of
epic poetry)
14-14. Then the Sun, the king of the empyrean, the bed of hot rays,
endowed with the three innate powers to glisten, heat and cheer bearing the
Immanent Lord Vishnu replete with the six sovereign excellences in the
center of his Orb, gradually rose passing through his three famous forms
known as Arunodaya (dawn), Ushodaya (day-break) and Suryodaya (Sunrise), worshipped by the wise, (well-versed in the Panchangas (mantranyasa etc.) meditating on the Gayatri and other mantras, like the mighty ruler
armed with the triple powers of energy, majesty and counsel ruling in all
prosperity his domain, exercising his six supreme regal powers (like interest
in the well-being of his friends, land and state-coffer) admired by his
diplomatic ministers skilled in the five administrative heads.
निनमर-निकर-कुना-व्रािमत्यन्त-िीव्रं
नस्थर-िरमनिलािांप्रानणिांरुद्ध-मागम
य ।्
भवुि-भवि-पणू
ं
भािमुािञ्जिाभं
हनरनरव ििराः
ै
प्राग र्नश्म-जालनै
िर
य
ास॥14-15॥
14-15. The Sun, before emerging out of his orb, with his cluster of rays
destroyed the pitch-darkness thickly-set, glowing like collyrium diffused all
the world over, impeding the thoroughfare of all living beings like the lion
with its cutting nails rending herd of dusky hued elephants that threaten and
hamper the smooth passage of the sentient beings.
मधरु-पिग-रावााः शान्त-िश
ै
ाम्ब-ुबाष्पााः
सपनद नवफुल-रागााः स्वानभसाराि प्र्सन्नााः।
अरुण-िरनणरत्यच्छाम्बरा नदक-्परुन्द्रीाः
नस्मि-सरनसज-वक्त्रााः स्वैाः करैरा-नलनलङ्गे॥14-16॥
14-16. The rising Sun caressed the quarters with his myriad rays in the clear
sky, sweetened with the melodious (twitter) of many birds at the fading of the
wide-spread dew drops dripping in the masked night, forth-with turned red
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 224

beaming with the blooming lotuses delighted with his stealthy march like an
impassioned lover embracing his fiancé, (clasping her with his arms) with
her smiling lovely, honeyed speech in dulect tone with molten pangs of love,
pleased with his concealed approach.
प्रणनि-रभस-धळू ी-बद्ध-शोभा-नवशषेा
दधरुुपकृनि-मत्तांसाध-ुजालान्तराप्तााः।
समरमपुििंस-ंवदेरन्तो वरस्या
इव-दश-शि-केिोाः केिवाः श्रावकाणाम॥्14-17॥
14-17. The rays of the thousand-splendored Sun, decorated with the dust
raised by the impetuous prostrations of the pupils, peeping through the
charming windows in all directions, obliged the disciples like loving friends by
reminding them to get ready for their morning lessons.
निनहिमनुचिमच्चु ंरोग-पीठं प्रवक्तु
ाः
पनरषनद पनरिोऽमी स-त्वरााः सत्त्व-भाजाः।
र्द्ु
िमवनसि-कृत्यध
ै
न्य
य -सन्यं ानस-वगैाः
श्रवण-परम-कृ त्यारोप-िस्थाः
ुसमिेााः॥14-18॥
14-18. The virtuous students (who in great haste rounded up their morning
duties in good time) along with the band of holy hermits squatted round the
preceptorial elevated dais (yoga-dais) placed in the lecture-hall to listen
(Shravana, being the prime task) to the learned discourse of the Acharya.
बभरुमल-गणुािांशोभिाच्छादिािां
मरु-नरप-ुनिलरािांहन्त वद
ै
ानन्तकीिाम।्
सपनद स-ुनवविृ ािामन्तरार्ा
यनधरांवा
नवनवध-कवनळकािांसञ्चरााः पनत्रकाणाम॥्14-19॥
14-19. The diverse collections dealing with scriptures, holding together the
bunches of leaves wrapped in de-lux linen and tied with twisted chaste
cords, the abiding abode of Lord Krishna, shortly to be uncovered (at the
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 225

commencement of the discourse) blazed like trails of thoughts in the minds
of the virtuous.
(The leaves of the sacred volumes glistened like the reflections of the
righteous who endowed with knowledge and devotion with their darkness
dispelled with scriptural enlightenment regard Lord Vishnu as their prime
refuge and with-hold supreme secrets from the un-merited.)
अिनि-नवरळ-भावा अप्यिन्योन्य-सङ्गााः
ऋज-ुिर-िि-िािा-पनि-साम्याप्त-शोभााः।
निरद-िरुग-दश्ेरा दूरिो वनजि
य
ान्तााः
कुशल-नलनिि-रपा रनेजरेिषे ुवणााः
य॥14-20॥
14-20. The alphabets written by dexterous writers that were neither too close
nor remote but straight and long, glowed with numerous lines even and
spread out, with well-set margins on all sides, assuming many times the
shapes of elephants and horses.
सपनद ददृशरुकेेवाचिीरानद-भागं
पनरचर-पट
ु
िाभ्ांिावदकेेनचरणे ।
हनर-गरुु-िमिंर्द्ाग र्त्िोऽमी नवधार
प्र-रररुपर-साम्यंनसद्धरेस्यानद्ध रत्ाः॥14-21॥
14-21. Some students could spot-out (could see) the earlier part of the
volume under study because of close association and smartness while
others could catch them (be similar) after a little while with some toil, with
(immediate) obeisance to Lord Narayana and Acharya Madhwa: Indeed,
hard labour brings sound success.
रि-वचनस-जिऽेनस्मन्ना-ििेसनन्नरस्यि ्
नसचर-रवनिकांिांसान्ध्य-जीमिू-रक्ताम।्
रनवनरव रनव-पज्यू ानिाः समाजान्तनरक्षे
व्यलसदनि-शरालुाः सि स् हस्र-प्रकाशाः॥14-22॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 226

14-22. After paying their referential greetings, the audience sat in silence
and when the curtain, red like the evening cloud was withdrawn,
Poornaprajna shone in the assembly like the Sun in the empyrean; nay
surpassing him in excellence and fit to be adored by him.
नत्रभवुि-वर-िजे ो-व्यक्त-वदेार्-य
शक्लु -
नत्रिर-रसिरा रेवनणि
य
ा वण-य
वरााः
य।
पर्ृ -ुमनिरर् िषेामक्य
ै
मापाद्य सम्यक्
प्रवचि पनरशद्ध्यु
ै
स्म प्रणौनि प्रवीणाः॥ 14-23॥
14-23. Later, Poornaprajna past-maser in disquisition, pronounced the
sacred omkara coalescing the three mystic-letters (A, U, Ma) that distil the
essence of the three vyahritis (Bhu, Bhuva, Svaha) which condense the
meanings of the three Vedas (Rik, Yajus, Sama) that manifest the excellent
(tejas) lustre (fire, wind and sun) of the three worlds (earth, sky and heaven)
powerful enough to make the discourses perfect.
स्वरमचरम-कालेमन्द्रमवात्यजनद्भाः े
स्फुटमपुनिषदन्तेवाचक
ै
वाच्य
य
माि।े
प्रवचिमनि-नचत्रंप्राण-भाजांश्रिुीिां
अमृिममृि-भावस्यष
ै
हेिंुचकार॥14-24॥
14-24. With the learners reading distinctly the Upanishad-Bhashya in a
steady low tone to start with, the Great Acharya used to deliver his exquisite
charming discourse, nectar-like to the ears of the listeners, capable of
yielding salvation. (To the deserving souls)
धिनमव स-धिारभ्े ोऽक
य-सिू
ाः
ुप्रसन्नाः
शर-शिनमव पार्ाः
य
सरं गुानर्भ्
य
उग्राः।
अरनि-नवरनहिाः सोऽिारिंिाऽनदशन्नो
प्रनि-वचिमदीिंचोदकेभ्ोऽनिलेभ्ाः॥14-25॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 227

14-25. The indefatigable Acharya being pleased with those that were really
inquisitive to know the truth blessed them with prompt replies without default
like Karna, the son of the Sun, freely distributing wealth to the indigent and
also unfailingly rebutted the volley of questions hurled by the hostiles out to
win him with speedy and cutting repartees like the formidable Arjuna raining
(hundreds of) arrows on the war-mongers.
अर् दश-शि-शोनचष्याप्ररानि प्रिीच्यां
प्रवचिमवसार स्नािमुाराि ि्टाकम।्
पर्ृ -ुमनिनरह िालच्छ्रेष्ठ-ससं ग-यलोलैाः
समगनम सपनद स्वनिम्न
य
गाद्यश्च
ै
िीर्ाः
ै॥14-26॥
14-26. Then, with the Sun in splendor (thousand-rayed) slightly moving to
the west, Poornaprajna hied close to the lake for a plunge after his morning
discourse, while the celestial river (Ganges) and the presiding deities of the
holy Tirthas hastily assembled there, anxious to come into contact with this
celebrity. (To sanctify themselves by his sacred touch)
घि-रस-निकरोऽसावन्तरत्यन्त-शद्धुो
मनुि-गण इव भरू
ाः स्नहेवाि प्र्ाग दधािाः ् ।
प्रनि-कृ निमनिल-ज्स्याऽपरोक्ष्यणे िावि ्
स्फुटमलभि रपंमज्जिेसज्जिष्टेम॥्14-27॥
14-27. The pure and crystal-clear water of the holy pond, viscid enough bore
the reflection of the Great Acharya before his dip and then it gained clearly
and directly during the plunge his actual form, esteemed by the virtuous, just
as the band of sages, chaste in mind and full of devotion, see the reflection
of the form of Lord Narayana and later with mature meditation behold him
face to face (in great ecstasy).
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 228

अपनरनमि-मिीषस्योल्लसच्छङ्क-बाहोाः
रर्-चरनण-नशलािां िन्विोऽत्रानभषके म।्
प्रनि-ििव उदारास्तास्वलंसनन्नधािाः
ु
ििव इव नवरजे ाः
ुपाञ्चजन्य-नप्ररस्य॥14-28॥
14-28. On the shore of the lake, while Poornaprajna gave a holy ablution to
the discus-marked sacred stones (Shalagramas) with the bright conch in his
right hand, his charming reflections in these glistening stones glittered (to the
deserving) like so many glowing forms of Lord Narayana, consort of
Lakshmi.
अनभ-दधनि मिुीन्द्रा िादशाब्दोपवासप्रनिम-फलमलं रि-्सवेिंभनक्त-रक्तु म।्
अनधकममर-िद्याद्याप्लवाद ्धन्यमान्याद ्
अनपबदलव-बोधो नवष्ण-ुपादोदकं िि॥्14-29॥
14-29. Poornaprajna devoutly sipped the holy water (Tirtha) declared by the
renowned saints to be equally fruitful to the rigid observance of a vowed fast
for a period of twelve-years but excelling the sacred dips in the celestial river
(Ganges) and other pure ponds held in veneration by the wise.
ष्मासफलदा गोदा वत्सरस्य िुजाहन्वी। िादश शाब्दोपवासस्य नवष्णपुादोदसवेिम।्रानि काि च् िीर्ानयि ब्रह्माडिान्तगिय ानि
च। नवष्णपुादोदक स्यिैेकलांिाहनयन्त षोिशीम॥् Quoted in Bhavapraksashika from
Krishnamruta Maharnava
िरणनभनरव गौरर
ै
ध्व-य
पड
ुरनै
ि-िषनभाः
सदर-परम-चक्रोदीण-िजे ा हरीष्टाः
मरु-नरप-ुनवमिु ािांदस्सहो दहे-भाजां
लर-समर इवान्यो मान्यधीरा-बभास॥े 14-30॥
14-30. Poornaprajna the favorite of the Lord Narayana, unendurable by his
foes, with his body smeared by twelve thick white marks pointed upwards
and with the conch and the discus prints adding to its lustre, blazed like the
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 229

twelve suns (that rise at the time of dissolution), betokening the advent of
another deluge.
समनधक-धीषणस्य प्रक्षे माणो जिौघाः
प्रकृ नि-मधरुमास्य-व्याज-पणून्द
े -नबम्बम।्
अमचुदपसरनेि श्रावकोक्तेाः परुाऽनस्मि ्
प्र-चलनि पदवीं िांप्राञ्जनलस्तणूम
य
ाराि॥्14-31॥
14-31. The thick crowd gazing intensely on the face of Poornaprajna
endowed with natural beauty charming as the moon, hastily receded without
request from the disciples with folded hands, to make way for the Acharya to
move un-hampered (to the monastery after his bath).
(The Acharya was held by the public in such high esteem)
गरुु-चरण-सरोज-िन्द्व-निणज
े
िााो
दधनि जि-निकारेसवम
य
वुी-गिंच।
अवनिरिनभिनन्दन्यप्यदश्चक्षमऽेसौ
कर्मनप कर्मवे स्याि क्ष् माख्याऽन्यर्ाऽस्यााः॥14-32॥
14-32. Mother Earth though displeased with the multitude, consecrating itself
by sprinkling the entire holy water that washed the lotus-feet of the divine
preceptor shed on her bosom, (sparing nothing for her) to hallow herself,
somehow sustained. Otherwise how can she deserve the appellation
‘Kshama’ (toleration)? (It highlights the exceptional excellence of the
Padodaka of the great Acharya and the deep devotion of the pious.)
अनवनदि-रस-भदेंशीिळंलघ्वगधं
नवमलममल-पानणाः पानणजर
ै
प्रनवष्टम।्
वदि-पवि-भीत्या पाश्वि
य ो नबभ्रदग्र्यं
कमर् करक-पणू
ं
सरं मीहाऽनििार॥14-33॥
14-33. A recluse who had subdued his senses, with cleansed hands brought
to the place of worship a water-jar filled with holy water, that was cool, light
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 230

and untasted, free from foul smell and untouched by nails, carrying it on oneside lest his breath would defile its purity.
(It puts forth the manner in which the holy water is to be provided for
worship.)
अगधमव्यक्तरसंशीिलञ्च िषृ ापहम।्अच्छंलघुच पथ्यञ्चिोरंगणुवदच्यि॥े
नवहनसि-नबस-भङ्ग-श्री-प्रकष
ंनसनिम्ना
जल-जममृि-परू
ाः
ै
परूरामास रम्यम।्
समर-गणु-नवशषेालोचक
ै
लाळ
य
िीराः
स-ुसरुनभ-समुिोनभाः स स्फुटम ग्ौर-पक्षाः॥ 14-34॥
14-34. Madhwacharya, the founder of the Vaishnava doctrine, greatly
revered by the Gods, competent to deliberate on the excellences of the
various tenets, filled the lovely conch lustrous-white like the broken-stalk of
the lotus with fragrant flowers and sacred water. (For the holy ablution of
Shalgramas and images.)
नवमल-मलरजााो-नबन्दनभश्चनचि
य
ाचो
िव-लनलि-िळु स्या-पष्पु -राज्याऽऽनचच
य
ि स् ाः।
स्थलज-जलज-वल्ली-वृक्ष-वीरुि-्समस्तप्रसव-नवजर-लक्ष्म्या मिूर
य
वेनेन्दरशे म॥्14-35॥
14-35. The great Acharya anointed the sacred stone-images with (bits) of
sandal-wood paste and worshipped Lord Narayana (present in them) with
fresh and soft holy basil-leaves that seemed like Goddess Tulasi incarnate
and with heaps of flowers (clipped from) the creepers spread on roofs and
on earth, in water and on the trees, that appeared like deities of flowers.
स दददनधक-बोधाः षोिशात्रोपचाराि ्
व्यरहरदगणुाि ि्ानत्रशं दागाः-परुोगाि।्
अगनणि-गणुमच्चुस्त
ै ोषरि श् ाङ्ग
य
पानणं
षिनप परम-भक्त्याऽिपूचाराि न्ददशे ॥14-36॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 231

14-36. Madhwacharya in his exemplary worship offered the sixteen
customary respectful adorations meticulously avoiding all blemishes
including the thirty-two transgressions and the six supplementary homages
with the extreme devotion and intensely pleased Lord Narayana full of
infinite auspicious attributes holding the Sharanga bow in hand.
(a)अघ्य,य पाद्य, आचमिीर, मधपुकय, पिुराचमिीर, स्नाि, वि, भषूण, रज्ोपवीि, आसि, गध, पष्पु , धपू, दीप, िवैोद्य,
िमस्कारााः – एिेषोिश उपचारााः। (b) मिु वासश्च िाम्बलू ं दपणय ंछत्रचामर।े पादकेचनेि नवज्रेा उपचारााः परेबधु ैइनिषट ्
अिपूचारााः। (c) for the 32 blemishes refer Bhavaprakashika)
िमरुण-मनण-वण
ंनदव्य-दहेाख्य-गहेे
स्ननपिमनि-पर्ृ -ुश्रद्धा-िदी-नचत्त-वानभाः
य।
ििुस रजनि नित्यंहृि-्सरोजासि-स्थं
ि िुसकृनदनि पष्पु र
ै
ष्टनभभाव
य -पष्पु
ाः
ै॥14-37॥
14-37. Indeed, it is not that he engaged in this diurnal ritual during the
worship with diverse flowers only once but he incessantly adored the rubytinted Sri Hari (of whom we are but a reflection) residing in the lotus of his
heart, in the temple of his divine body, giving the sanctimonious bath with
the water of his mind picked from the river of absolute faith with the eight
exquisite flowers of feeling.
(The eight Bhava-pushpas are non-voilencce, sense-control, kindness to all
beings, tolerance, knowledge, penance, meditation and truth.)
अनहंसा, सत्य,ं आस्तरे,ं ब्रह्मचरं, अपनरग्रहाः, शौच,ं िनुष्टाः, सवसय मपणय ं– इनि अष्ट भावपष्पु ानण। अनहंसा प्रर्मंपष्पु ं
पष्पु नमनन्द्ररनिग्रहाः। सवभय िूदरापष्पु ंक्षमापष्पु ंनवनशष्यि।े ज्ािपष्पु ं िपाः पष्पु ंध्यािपष्पु ंिुसप्तमम।्सत्यंचवैाष्टमं
पष्पु मनेभस्तष्यु नि केशवाः॥ भावप्रकानशका
कृ ि-परम-सपराः
य
सान्द्र-सच्चन्दिाााः
पनरमनळि-भजु ोरो-मडिलासं ो मिीषी।
नस्थि-रुनचर-मिु न्दे ाः नस्नग्ध-कौशरे-वासााः
स मनुि-सरु-िराणांचक्षषुामत्सु वोऽभिू॥्14-38॥
14-38. Thus adoring the supreme Lord, the Great Acharya, robed in soft silk
rendered fragrant with the aroma of sandal paste applied to his shoulder,
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 232

chest and arms, with his beaming moon-like face charmed with sweet smile,
was a veritable feast to the eyes of the Gods, sages and the human beings.
परमर् परमान्नंप्राप्तमवेाप्ररासं
प्रभनुरह बभुजुऽेसौ वदे-वाद-प्रवीणाः।
अनजि-परम-भक्ताः सन्तिंमन्यमािाः
सकल-जगदधीशाः प्रीरिांशौनरनरत्थम॥्14-39॥
14-39. Then Madhwacharya, the expert exponent of the Vedas and the
supreme devotee of the Invincible, in ever remembrance of Him, praying in
earnestness, ‘Let Sri Krishna, the master, the regulator of the universe be
pleased’ heartily accepted the sumptuous alms obtained without effort (with
ease) as the grace of the divine.
कवलेकवलेकुविय ग् ोनवन्दस्यािकुीििय म ज् ीवन्मक्तु ोऽन्यर्ा कुविय क्ेवलोदरपरूकाः।
सहचर-पनरक्लप्तेसक्ष्मू विास्तिृ ऽेसौ
अनव-िि-ुरुह-रपौशीर-वर
ेनिषडणाः।
अरमरनदह िािा-हृद्य-नवद्या-नवलासैाः
कनव-जि-पनरवारंमडिरि म् डिपाग्र्यम॥्14-40॥
14-40. Anandatirtha, occupying the elevated cushioned woolen seat covered
by the nice cloth kept ready by his disciples, decked the splendid lecturehall, delighting the learned devotees assembled round him, with his
enlightening discourses on scriptural topics sauced with streaks of humour.
अवसरमनधगम्य भ्रू-नवजृाादभीष्टो
मिु -सिि-ग-लक्षी-भिू-पानण-प्रवाळाः।
नस्मि-िरि-नवकासैस्तस्यनवज्ाि-भावाः
श्रवनस नकमनप कार
ं
मन्त्ररामास मि॥
ु
14-41॥
14-41. With the movement of the eyebrow of the Acharya, his dear disciples
took the opportunity to approach him, guessing his intention with his gentle
smile and blown eyes and whispered low in his ear (concerning some
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 233

imminent work) with his handsome palm across his mouth lest his breath
would before his master and soon sought his considered counsel.
प्रणनि-परम-कृत्यााः सन्मिरे े
जिौघााः
नवबभरुिनि-दूरेसहं िास्ताििीत्य।
अहमहनमकराऽऽशुप्राप्य पाश्व
ं
प्रणमेाः
ु
बहव इह गहृ-स्थााः पवू-य
सवेांनवधािमु॥्14-42॥
14-42. Many householders in their anxiety to assert their primacy in serving
the saintly Acharya (in this contest to serve him first) briskly attained his
vicinity to offer their humble homage, overtaking the people who had already
collected in large numbers round him having paid their respectful greetings
(to their master) – a prime task for the devotee.
नवनवध-जि-पद-स्थााः प्राक श्रिुभ्े ो गणुभ्े ाः
शि-गणु-गणुमिे ंनवनस्मिा वीक्षमाणााः।
मकुुनळि-कर-पद्मा आस्यिानमत्यवाप्तााः
प्रचरुिर-हृदा सावाराञ्चनक्ररऽेन्य॥े 14-43॥
14-43. The Acharya honoured the group of people, gathered from various
places having heard of his eminence, standing there with folded hands
startled to see him equipped with qualities thousand-fold more than they had
heard of, with a noble gesture to be seated.
अलमलमि-ुवादिेाि-ुवाच्यिे पश्चाि ्
ििुगरुुव इदािीमद्युिा नह प्रवक्तुम।्
ि मििमधिुा र्द्ागाव्रजत्ये ाह्वरि ि्ाि ्
श्रिु-पनरचर-सक्ताि श्र् ावकाि श्र् ावकाग्र्याः॥14-44॥
14-44. A distinguished disciple of Great Acharya summoned his fellowstudents engaged in recollecting the lessons already covered: ‘Enough of
repeating the portions already heard. You can as well attend to it later. Be
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 234

not engaged in reflection as the preceptor is getting ready to deliver his
dissertation: so hurry up. (Come soon)’ (An arresting Guru-Kula schedule).
अनधक-नधषणमिे ंव्याख्यरा शोभमािं
हनरनमव कनव-वर
ं
सत्यवत्यास्तिजू म।्
सििमनिनमषंसन्दृश्र सािन्द-नचत्तााः
समरमनप गिंसनंवर्द्िेि स्म लोकााः॥14-45॥
14-45. The concourse stared with a stead-fast look of intense delight on
Madhwacharya dazzling during his discourse as if he was Lord Vedavyasa,
the son of Satyavati being quite oblivious of the passage of time.
उदरनमि इवास्तंरश्चं भािबुभ
य
ासे
स्फुटमकलुष-रपो दशि
य ीरोऽिरुागी।
शनुच हनरपदमापत्सम्पदोरानश्रिािां
ि नह भवनि नवशषेाः स्व-प्रकाशोन्निािाम॥्14-46॥
14-46. The Sun as he set beamed clean and chaste in form, pleasant to the
sight, rubescent in colour as when he rose in the morning; like-wise the
illustrious ones gleam with their innate glow and shelter themselves at the
feet of Lord Narayana unaffected by weal or woe in life. (Unlike the
intoxicated ones who undergo modification with success or failure.)
मरिक-मनण-वण
े
भिू-धात्री-परुन्ध्यााः
लसनि जलनध-वासस्यध-य
लीिाः क्षणाधम
य ।्
अरुण-िरनण-नबम्ब-च्छद्मिा पद्मरागाः
कनपश-कर-कलापोल्लास्यभिू प्र्क्षे णीराः॥14-47॥
14-47. Mother Earth sparkling like a ruby for a little while, with the myriad
crimson rays of the Sun with his disc half-sunk in the sea robed in sapphire,
was a sight to see. (Mother earth is compared to a maiden, the sun to the
ruby and the ocean to her vestments.)
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 235

अवनि-वि-विध्रग्
ुवार-ुिाहम्महत्सु
प्रकृ नि-गणु-समिेाव्याकृिाकाश एकम।्
ििमिि-ुमिााः सोऽनचन्तरि स् ि-्समाधौ
असरु-सरु-िरभ्े ाःसद-्गणु ंिार्मन्यम॥्14-48॥
14-48. The lofty-minded Acharya during his propitious period of profound
concentration meditated on the supreme sovereign endowed with faultless
auspicious attributes like knowledge and bliss, pervading the earth, water,
fire, air, sky, ahankara tatwa, mahat-tatwa and the unmanifest sky along with
the constituents of nature, (Satwa, Rajas and Tamas) entirely different from
the demons, gods and human beings.
व्यदधि पनरदृष्ट-ज्योनिषाः साधुसान्ध्यं
निरममवनि-दवेा ज्योनिषोऽप्यावलोकाि।्
नवनहिमि-ुसरन्तो धम-य
शाि-प्रवीणााः
सनविनर सनविारं नचन्तरन्तनिलोक्यााः॥14-49॥
14-49. The Brahmins accompanying the Acharya, proficient in religious
scriptures, rigorously observing the prescribed code of conduct, properly
attended to their evening rites contemplating on the Creator of the three
worlds seated in the sun’s disc during the period prior to the dusk when the
rays of the sun could be seen till the stars were visible in the sky.
पवूांसन्ध्या सिक्ष ं त्रांउत्तरांस नदवाकरम।्पवूांसन्ध्यांजपनंस्तष्ठिे स् ानवत्री आकयदशिय ाि।्उत्तरांिुसमासीि सम्यक्
ऋक्षनवभाविाि -् भावप्रकानशका॥
नवनवदरनि-िरांरेदवेिााः षोिशोक्ता
हर-हनरहर-पवूान्त्य
य
ााः कला-भदेिोऽस्य।
स-ुहुिमनि-सृजन्तोऽग्न्यानहिास्तऽेनग्न-होत्रं
व्यधरुुनचिमपवू
ं
रिे गारत्र-लोकााः॥14-50॥
14-50. Those Brahmins who maintained the sacred fire, and knew
adequately the sixteen Gods (related to the holy fire) along with Rudra and
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 236

Indra at the beginning and end, so catalogued because of the internal digital
differences (secondary divisions), performed this unique ritual of worship
worthy of them, offering oblations into the sacrificial fire (with words ‘not
mine’) meritorious enough to secure the abode of Vishnu (Vaikunta) who
saves those who sing his glories.
नवधरुरमकळङ्काः स्याद ्रनद स्यादवश्रं
िि-ुनिज-सहजारााःसन्दु रास्यन्दे -कल्पाः।
इनि सरु-ललिानभलानय
ळिाः िचे रीनभाः
समनधक-मधनुरम्णा पणूच
य
न्द्रस्तदोदि
ै॥्14-51॥
14-51. Then rose the full moon, so extolled by the celestial damsels tripping
in the sky, (for her exceeding loveliness): ‘If perchance the moon were to be
without her dark stain she (moon) would resemble Mahalakshmi in her
matchless excellence.’
इि-नवरहमसह्यंप्राप्य पद्माः
ै
स-चक्रैाः
नचरनमह पनरिप्तंपवू-य
िप्ताः
ै
स-ुिष्टुम।्
मृद-कुमदु-चकोरैाः पाद-सङ्गेि राज्ाः
कमनप सकल-हृद्यंकल्परन्ने व
ै
दव
ै
म॥्14-52॥
14-52. The Charvaka birds and the lotus-flowers that suffered unbearable
separation from the Sun during the night were greatly distressed by the
touch of the moon while the chakora bird and the tender blue lotus-flower
that could not brook the heat of the Sun were intensely delighted with the
kiss of the moon: Indeed fortune does not shower things pleasant on all.
दनलिन्द्रे -िील-मनण-िील-नवभ्रमं
िव-कुन्द-कुद्मळ-नसि-निजावनल।
नस्मिरा िगोत्तम-नशरस्स-ुजािरा
वि-मालरा सरुनभिाशराऽनन्विम॥्14-53॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 237

14-53. Lord Vishnu glistened blue like the glimmer of the split-blue emerald,
with the line of teeth glowing white like the new buds of the Jasmine, decked
with a perfumed wreath woven with flowers blooming at the tips of the best
of the trees like Parijata spreading their sweet smell in all directions. (Like
the blue-tinted heaven studded with stars twinkling white.)
मृदगानम-नवमाि-सम्पदो
रमरि स् -ुनस्मि-गोप-सन्दु रीाः।
पनरिाप-नवहीिमज्ज्वु लम ्
स-ुििंसक्षू-िराम्बरंवरम॥्14-54॥
14-54. The all-pervasive Lord Krishna robed in dainty raiment, supreme and
splendorous, free from all anguish, sported with the charming Gopis tripping
in tardy gait, shorn of shyness beaming with a sweet smile.
गोनभस्तमास्यं पिरि ग्नि-दंप्रजािाम ्
अर्ान्त
य
रंस भगवाि प्र्कटीचकार।
आिन्द-नचद-्गणु-गणंपनरपणू -य
सनंवि ्
चन्द्रस्तुशब्ध-गणुनमत्यरमवे भदेाः॥14-55॥
14-55. The praise-worthy Poornaprajna divulged in his descant the supreme
substance designated Lord Krishna full of faultless virtues like knowledge
and bliss along with those detailed in the above two verses (53 & 54) and
destroyed the ignorance of the listeners and granted the great ends of life to
the virtuous while the Goddess of the moon shining with the myriad stars
removing the darkness of the night unveiled by her delightful beams only
one element known as the sky, the greatest among the five elements,
garlanded with the mighty-trees growing on lofty mountains like Meru with
the sporting supernal damsels sojourning in the vast expanse, subtle and allpervasive, free from agony (being jada) accommodating (affording
necessary passage) but only one attribute namely ‘Sound’. Thus the
Acharya excelled the moon in excellence with this distinctive difference.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 238

इनि श्रीमत्कनव-कुल-निलक-नत्रनवक्रम-पनडििाचार-यसिु श्री-िारारण-पनडििाचार-यनवरनचिे
श्री-मध्व-नवजरे महा-काव्ये-आिन्दानङ्किेचिदुशय
ाः सगाः
य
पञ्चदशाः सग:
य-[15-141]
भरूो-बोधस्तिो भरूो व्याचख्यौ भाष्यमद्भि
ु
म।्
ग्रामेग्रामीण-सामान्येवसस्तं त्रामरालर॥े 15-1॥
15-1. Poornaprajna then tarried in a temple common to the people of the
village Kudel by name and conducted his exceptional discourses on
Brahma-Sutrabhashya.
पर-पक्ष-रर्ारढंिर-िक
य-महारधुम।्
नत्रनवक्रमार
ं
सोऽपश्रि प्र्नि-वीरनमवाग्रिाः॥15-2॥
15-2. Madhwacharya saw Trivikramacharya face to face as formidable
adversary in a field of a war, mounting the chariot of hostile philosophy
armed with powerful missiles of pungent logic.
िदा िदाििाभं ोजाद ्वत्तृ ोपन्यास-भारिी।
सिेा सिेाग्रहा नदव्या नशनभरानदव निरर
य ौ॥15-3॥
15-3. (Trivikramacharya was carefully listening to) the disquisitions bent
upon firmly establishing the supremacy of Lord Narayana, the creator of the
universe that darted from the Acharya’s charming mouth like the troops of an
army marching out of their tents to bag a decisive victory for their emperor.
िात्यत्वरा िानि-ररा ि-स्खलनन्त निरन्तरा।
अििावरवत्ये वे दवीरोनभाः प्र-िनकििा॥15-4॥
15-4. His superb exposition of the scriptures was neither tardy nor rapid nor
stumbling but a ceaseless flow and its impact was so irresistible that the
audience at a distance was oblivious of its corporate nature (components
parts like letter and sound) like the march of a legion in measured treads to
give credence to remote onlookers as if it was one solid block in motion
(undivided into infantry, cavalry etc.)
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 239

सत्रू-स्यन्दि-वन्दृ ाढ्ा दवार
य-श्रनुि-वारणा।
सपूपनत्त-महापनत्तनवनय
चत्र-स्मनृि-सनप्तका॥15-5॥
15-5. His virile and eloquent commentary, emblazoned with quadruple
missiles the weighty Brahmasutras, the impregnable Vedas, the plethora of
powerful Shrutis and the wizardry of his logic, had the semblance of the
Chaduranga Sena (army consisting of four divisions) containing the chain of
chariots, hordes of elephants, the cavalry and the infantry respectively.
वनधि
य ोनम-यहनर-प्रष्ठेा स-ुपरो-धर-स-ुस्वरा।
सनविाि-प्रकाशार्ा
य
सागरी नश्रनरवापरा॥15-6॥
15.6. His unique lectures in the solemn tone of a rumbling cloud expatiating
exhaustively on the topic on hand, free from the six blemishes (modifications
like increase and decrease), gushing out of his mouth extolling Sri Hari
appeared as if another Mahalakshmi, the dear consort of Lord Vishnu, bereft
of the six infirmities with imposing breasts and sonorous voice, commanding
extensive wealth, emerged from the ocean.
पद्मशे -पद-पद्म-नश्रि क्ृत्याङ्गं पद्म-जन्मिाः।
लानळिा नशरसशे िे गङ्गेवाशषे-पाविी॥15-7॥
15-7. His moving oration, glorifying the sovereignty of Lord Narayana,
enabling the eligible (Ruju gana) souls to occupy and discharge the duties of
Chaturmukha Brahma, highly reverenced by Mahadeva and potent enough
to purify the devoted listeners, resembled the Holy Ganges in her devotion to
the blissful feet of Sri Hari, in her availability to the Lotus-born Brahma in
laving the feet of his father, her being borne with great respect on his crest
by Shankara and sanctifying the whole world with her holy impress.
(This verse drives home the paramountcy of Madhwa Siddhanta (doctrine),
dear to Lord Vedavyasa that propounds and propagates the supremacy of
Sri Hari and purifies its dear devotees and paves their way to bliss eternal.)
िारारणोऽिन्त-गणुो ब्रह्माख्यो वदे वनेदिाः।
नवश्व-किने
ि नवश्व-ज्ाः श्रत्यु ा रक्त्यु ाऽप्यसीषधि॥्15-8॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 240

15-8. Poornaprajna established once for all on the firm foundation of the
Apourusheya Vedas and irrefutable logic that the omniscient Lord Narayana,
full to the brim with the treasure of infinite propitious qualities, the author of
the eightfold dispensation of the universe, designated as Brahman, is the
prime import of Vedas.
(This couplet capsulates the essence of Madhwa-Siddhanta).
िारारणंनिनिलपणूगय णुकैदहें निदोषमाप्यिममप्यनिलाःैसवुाक्याःै। आस्योद्भवानद मशषेनवशषेिोऽनप वन्द्यंसदा नप्ररिमंमम
सन्नमानम। 9. परोऽब्वानद च िोपमा। (अिव्यु ाख्याि 2,2,3)
प्रधािमपराधीिंकारणंपनरणानम रि।्
परोवनदनि चिे स् ाध्य-वक
ै
ल्यंस्यानन्नदशि
य ॥े 15-9॥
15-9. If it be put forth that Prakrati, (Primordial matter), since it undergoes
modification, is the independent cause of the cosmos like milk which turns
into curds, then this argument suffers from the fallacy of Sadhya-Vaikalya
(absence of the major term in the cited example where milk is not an
independent factor).
(These two lines refute the atheistic Sankhya view which upholds the
inanimate primordial matter as the independent creative principle to bring the
universe into existence, by convincing that an independent animate principle
Lord Narayana and not inanimate Prakriti is the creator of the universe and
his omnipresence is responsible for even transforming insentient milk into
curds.)
नववादाध्यानसिा सनृष्टश्चिेिच्छे ाि-ुसानरणी।
सनृष्टत्वाि प्ट-सृनष्टवत्य
े
िमुा पक्ष-सानधका॥15-10॥
15-10. In this moot-point, the inference that the creation of the universe
takes place according to the will of the sentient, as it is a creation like the
creation of cloth, supports the Dwaitin who posits (sentient) Sri Hari as the
independent creator of the world.
(Being inanimate, Prakriti cannot evolve of its own. It is to be propelled by
the omnipotent Ishwara. This principle is the corner-stone of Vedantic
Theism.)
चिेिच्छे ासारणे रदा दृष्टाः पटोभ्दवाः एिादृशत्वमन्यश्च वस्तत्वु ात्केि वारिय ।े - अिव्यु ाक्याि (2,2.1)
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 241

11. A) सनन्नधािाि च् िेिस्य वििय ेरद्यचिेिम ि् र्ाप्यवनृद्धपवूत्वय ादक्तदोषाः समो भविे॥ ( ् अिव्यु ाख्याि-2, 2, 7) B)
िदङ्गत्वोनक्तिश्चवै स्यात्सवस्यय ापलापकाः॥ (अिव्यु ाख्याि 2, 2, 8) C) अनङ्गत्वंरनद िस्यवै स्वािन्त्र्यंचन्ने चानिलम ्
ित्प्ररेणऽेप्यशक्तत्वांस्विन्त्रोऽन्यो ह्यपनेक्षिाः॥ अिव्यु ाख्याि 2, 2, 10)
रच्चिेिाचिेिरोरङ्गानङ्ग-त्वानद मन्वि।े
सष्टृावीशािपक्षे ारांिन्न शोभि-िांव्रजिे॥्15-11॥
15-11. Even the Sankhya view, which admits of the complementarity of the
sentient and the insentient but gives primacy of place to the insentient, the
sentient playing the second fiddle, is not acceptable to the judicious since it
also abnegates an independent All-Powerful Ishwara as the creator of the
Universe whose presence is necessary for bringing into contact Prakrati with
Purusha.
(As milk becomes curds with the help of a sentient, Pradhana also brings the
universe into being with the assistance of a sentient. This is the essence of
this doctrine. It flatly denies the existence of an All Powerful, Independent
Ishwara besides the sentient, thus contravening the Vedic affirmation that
even milk turns into curds because of the omnipresence of the Supreme
Being – Uttama Purusha that activates the Purusha (Sentient) and Pradhana
(non-sentient) alike.)
सव-यनवनन्ननमि
य ंसव
ं
कदानचत्कत्व-हेििु
ाः।
ि रदवेंिो िदवेंरर्ाऽत्मिेीश्वरािमुा॥15-12॥
15-12. The Kevala-vyatireki Anumana (logical discontinuance) brings round
the blatant agnostic and makes him to accept the existence of a Sovereign
Ishwara thus: The things that exist at present but were not in existence
before are created by someone (obviously by God). That which is not
created by God always exists (being eternal like Atman).
(This inference highlights the existence of an Independent Supreme Creator,
one Uttama Purusha besides Purusha (sentient) and Prakrati (non-sentient).
It is a fitting reply to the frank atheist who treats only Pratyaksha (reality) as
the sole Pramana. It pulls down his line of reasoning;
‘Pratyaksha fails to function since Ishwara, being super-sensuous is not
visible to the eyes, Anumana (Logic) does not operate as there is no
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 242

example of another powerful Ishwara and Agama (Veda) the only stronghold of the vedantin to prove the existence of the Almighty (transcendental
things) is out of our fold: So the all-powerful creator is out of court.’)
बलार सवाि
य
मुािांवदेााः स्यरुर
ै
पानलिााः।
कामदिेााः प्र-विन्त
य ेकानमन्य इव भिनृय
भाः॥15-13॥
15-13. If Anumana comes into existence with the support of some Agama, it
is reckoned as valid reasoning: if not so, then it can cut both ways like
unchaste wives uncontrolled by their husbands.
(They fail to prove the existence of transcendental things like God which are
beyond the range of perception.)
कारणंपनरणानम स्याद ्ब्रह्म िो चिेित्विाः।
ि रनदत्थंिो िनदत्थंरर्ा क्षीर-परुस्सरम॥्15-14॥
15-14. Brahman being sentient will not undergo any modification:
substances insentient like milk undergo transformation.
(This verse repudiates the doctrine of Brahma-Parinama view (the
transformation of Brahman into the world) propounded by Bhaskaracharya.
So profound was its influence that even Ramanujacharya, in his conflict of
loyalties succumbed to it.)
ि नवश्व-कृि प्श-ुपनिाः श्ररूमाणागणुत्विाः।
चत्र
ै
वि न्कं पिुनवघ्न
य -ब्रर्ध्ाद्या बाल-शनङ्किााः॥15-15॥
15-15. Pashupati (Mahadeva) cannot be the creator of the universe since he
suffers from deficiencies as enunciated in the Vedas like Chaitra (an
ordinary human being); then what of those who rank low in gradation like the
Sun, Ganapati and Skanda that are preferred to the authorship of the
universe?
(This verse squashes off the theories that ensconce lower Gods like Skanda,
Surya and Ganapati as originators of the world on the authority of the
Vedas.)
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 243

ििुसौख्यानदमाि ि्शे ो दाःिानद-रनहित्विाः।
रो िव
ैंस्याि स् िव
ैंस्याद ्रर्ा ससं नृिमानिनि॥15-16॥ insert
anuvyakhyana edit…..
15-16. So the Vaisheshika propounds: Ishwara is not a well of bliss as he is
devoid of distress: pleasure and pain walk hand in hand as in the case of
embodied Jiva.
(The Acharya so paraphrases the narrow Vaisheshika doctrine that admits
only eight sovereign attributes of got but denies him bliss infinite, the most
outstanding of his qualities, believing in the invariable concomitance of
pleasure and pain. It conflicts with the Dwaitin’s well-grounded faith in God’s
infinite perfections.)
एवंचदे ्नवमिो ज्ािी ि भ्रानन्त-रनहित्विाः।
रो िव
ैंस्याि स् िव
ैंस्याद ्भवीवत्ये िमुीरि॥े 15-17॥
15-17. Anumanatirtha (the master-logician) disarms the opponent by posing
a counter-argument that will divest Ishwara of another of his precious
attributes, admitted by the adversary:
‘Ishwara, the subject of controversy does not even possess knowledge being
free from illusion, the logic being, he who has knowledge has delusion too,
like the man of the world’ (Inference by itself can play fair and foul and can
never be trusted as valid proof).
सवज्
य
स्याज्िांवदेाः श्रद्धरेो नवरुणनद्ध चिे ।्
िस्यव
ै
ामन्दमािन्दम व्दन्नाश्राव्यसौ कर्म॥्15-18॥
15-18. If it is maintained by the disputant that the trustworthy Vedas
disapprove ignorance to the omniscient Ishwara then the Acharya comes out
with the disparaging question as to how similar commanding Vedic
utterances extolling his (Ishwara’s) abounding bliss have not reached his
sensitive ears.
(The opponent is beat on his own ground: if he accepts the first, he has to
silently bag the second too, as they emerge from the same source).
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 244

दाःिंपनर-नजहीषि
य
र्ाः सिु ंिोरी-नचकीषनय
ि।
स हन्ताऽपनििंदाःिमीशस्य व्यस्मरज्जळाः॥15-19॥
15-19. The Great Acharya further adverts: ‘If the witless Vaisheshika denies
bliss to the infinitely blissful in straining to relieve him of distress, he forgets
that his own avowal leads him to accept sorrow for Ishwara, the logic being
he who has not happiness must have grief’.
(A worldly being must have either of the two, pain or pleasure, lest he will
cease to be sentient. If Ishwara, a sentient being is bereft of bliss then he
courts misery. Is it not then graceful to accept unalloyed bliss for Ishwara?)
रो दाःि-समवारोऽरंचत्र
ैेििे ह्यभदेवाि।्
समवाराः कनश्चदीशेिदिके -त्वमन्यर्ा॥15-20॥
15-20. He further pin-points the weakness and inefficacy of the Vaisheshika
Philosophy because of his acceptance of the Samavaya (Intimate relation)
relation thus:
The Samavaya relation of knowledge and desire existing in Ishwara being
non-different from the famed relation of sorrow present in Chaitra (worldly
being), He will never be free from grief. If it be argued that Samavaya
relations are different, then the Vaisheshikas will have to accept the many
ness of Samavaya which goes against their doctrine and face the fallacy
called Apasiddhanta (imperfect logical proof) since the Tarkikas designate
the relation between Guna and Guni (substance and attributes) as
Samavaya relation (relation of Inseparables) which according to them is only
one and none different from each other.
औपानधकोऽस्य भदेश्चिे स् त्योऽसत्याः नस्वदच्यिाम।्
िद ्िरंचोक्त-दोषंनह मानर-वन्मा वदिे प्रम॥्15-21॥
15-21. Acharya further warns: ‘If you still contend that Samavaya though
only one, may be different due to difference in Upadhis i.e. the Samavaya of
Chaitra will differ from the Samavaya of Maitra, then the Samavaya of
Ishwara will also be different’.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 245

Further, answer my question is Samavaya true or false? In case it is true,
there will be many Samavayas and if it is a false, Ishwara will have the
Samavaya of grief. You cannot argue like the Mayavadins that it is neither
real nor unreal but different from both (Sadasad-Vilakshana which leads to
self-contradiction).
ब्ररूरौपानधकं भदेंज्ािादीिांरदात्मिाः।
िीत्याऽिरा िनन्नरासाि स्य् ाि ि्स्यािन्त-धमि
य
ा॥15-22॥
15-22. The same reasoning which repudiates the difference in Samavaya
due to the Upadhis also negates your affirmation of difference in
Paramatman’s various attributes of knowledge and the like due to Upadhis
and eventually the principle that the supreme, being an abode of infinite
innate perfections, comes to be established.
गणुानद-भदेेसम्बध मपक्ष्ये ाप्यिवनस्थिाःे।
नवशषे-मात्रणे ाऽिन्त्यंगणुािांशोभिेनवभोाः॥15-23॥
15-23. In case the Vaisheshikas accept the principle of difference between
diverse qualities of a substance, then one difference will lead to another
difference and so on and face the fallacy of Infinite Regress (unlike the
Dwaitin who succeeds in upholding the infinite qualities of the Almighty and
asserting the non-difference between the subject and its attributes – (though
not ontologically different - Swagatabheda Varjita) by the principle of
Vishesha (a representative of difference which can apprehend and describe
the attributes from their substances) and thus lead to the glorification of the
supreme as the possessor of infinite auspicious qualities.)
मन्यन्तेशन्यू मवेान्येित्वमागम-वैनरणाः।
मिा माध्यनमकास्तऽेनप व्यक्ताश्चन्ना इनि िर॥े 15-24॥
15-24. Madhyamikas, a major sect among the Buddhists different from the
Vaisheshikas who detest the Vedas regard Shunya (Void) as the Ultimate
Truth. They fall into two divisions, open Shunyavadins (Madhyamikas
themselves) and disguised Madhyamikas, the Maya-Vadins.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 246

शन्यू ंब्रह्माह्वरिेाऽहुाः स्वाश्चं वदेानन्तिोऽभ्धाः
ु।
अ-ित्वावदेकं वदेंवदन्तश्चरमेिलााः॥15-25॥
15-25. The last termed as concealed Shunyavadins, (Mayavadins), wicked
as they are, pose themselves as Vedantins and deny validity to the Veda in
the same breath, branding it as Atatwa-vedaka (not informing the true
Nature of Brahman) and designate the Shunya (the Void of the Buddhists)
as Brahman.
पर-ित्व-नववित्व
य
ादपरस्यानिलस्य च।
अ-नवशषेत्विश्चास्य िान्तरन्तरमिेरोाः॥15-26॥
15-26. Since the Maya-vadin advocates that the lower principle (the universe
constituted of the elements like the sky) is only an appearance (false), an
imposition on the higher principle Brahman (the only reality) and his
Brahman has no distinguishing features of his own compared to Shunya
there is no dissimilarity whatsoever between Brahma and Shunya and
hence no difference also between Shunya Vada and Mayavada.
अिडि-िडिि-न्याराििडिमनप िडिरि।्
अिडिरदिडि-ज्ो िराश्चािडिल ं -निषाः॥15-27॥
15-27. Poornaprajna with valid reasonings and authoritative sanctions
squashed Shunyavadins and the Mayavadins the despisers of Gods, who
had refuted his doctrine by a chain of willful and perverse reasonings
including their unworthy concept of Brahman bereft of its distinguishing
features.
नवमिंकारणंि स्यादसत्वान्न रदीदृशम।्
िदृेशंिद ्रर्ा कुा-कित्य
े
त्रािमुीरि॥े 15-28॥
15-28. The Shunyavad stands confuted with the Vyatireki Anumana (logical
discontinuance) thus: ‘Shunya the subject of discord, cannot be the creator
of the universe because it is Asat (unreal) since that which is responsible for
creation must be real (exist) like the Potter’.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 247

अहो िापस िो शन्यू ंकारणंकुा-किवृय
ि।्
रि-्सवं त्यृ नुत्थिंनवश्वंिि क् ारणनमिीरि
य ॥े 15-29॥
एवंचिे क् ारणंमा स्म ब्रवीाः शन्यू ंकर्ञ्चि।
आरष्मु स्तं दनध-ष्ठािंव्यनुत्त्सस्व गरुोगहृये॥15-30॥
15-29/30. Likewise the Shunyavadin puts up his defense:
‘Oh Sage! Not Shunya but the ignorance of Shunya, which is the (cause) of
the appearance of the Universe, is its creator in a manner as Shukti (nacre)
is the cause of silver’.
Again the Dwaitin retorts: ‘oh long lived one! If it be so, then do not contend
that void is the cause of the universe and understand the difference between
the substratum (place of appearance) and the cause, at the feet of your
preceptor.
(Shunya becomes the substratum (Adhistana), place of appearance in case
it is asserted that there is an appearance of the world because of the
ignorance of the Shunya; hence it cannot be the cause. It displays the
ignorance of the opponent who cannot discern the difference between the
substratum and the cause.)
नववादस्य पदंि स्यादनध-ष्ठािमसत्त्विाः।
वध
ै
म्यण
े
ष
ै
दृष्टान्ताः शक्त्यु ानद-वनदिीरि
य ॥े 15-31॥
15-31. Further to put him out of court, the Dwaitin exposes the Shunyavadin
by citing an example of dis-similarity thus: ‘Shunya, the topic under debate
cannot even be the substratum as it is Asat (unreal); since the abode for the
super imposition must by real like nacre’.
अित्वावदेकं मािनमनि स्व-व्याहिंरिाः।
िद-्वादी ििे वदेस्य सोऽनभ-प्रत्य
ै
प्रमाणिाम॥्32॥
15-32. To the Mayavadin who refuses to be clubbed with the Buddhists
because of some hair-splitting difference like his seeming acceptance of the
validity of the Vedas, there is this rejoin of the Great Acharya:
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 248

If to vindicate Atatwa-vedaka as authoritative is self-contradictory (like the
son of a barren woman), the Mayavadin will-nigh denies the validity of the
Vedas along with his comrade Buddhists since he slights a large part of the
Vedas as not imparting the true knowledge of Brahman (Atatwa-vedaka).
रंित्वावदेकं वदे वदेाशं ंवदे-दूषकाः।
ित्वस्यावणि
य ीरत्वाि स् ित्वावदेकाः कर्म॥्15-33॥
15-33. Since the Mayavadin advocates that his Brahmin is indescribable,
how can even that portion of the Vedas called Upanishads which alone can
impart the correct knowledge of Brahman according to him, reveal the truth?
(be Tatwa-Vedaka) (This discloses his hidden disbelief in the validity of
Vedas like the Shunyavadin.)
लक्षणानभाः प्र-विन्त
य ेवाक्यानि निसनभृ रनय
द।
नवषर-त्वंलक्षणािांिस्यव
ै
ानिष्टमागिम॥्15-34॥
15-34. Even though the Mayavadin defends that the Vedic sentences can as
well describe Brahman by the three types of implication (Lakshana-vritti) the
Dwaitin disarms him with a counterargument that his attributeless Brahman
(being indescribable - Avachya) cannot be propagated by any word as it
gathers a quality (becomes Savishesha) being the subject of a Lakshana, to
vitiate his doctrine (Nirvishesha Brahman).
(In case he accepts topicality of any type (Visayatwa) in respect of Brahman
he courts Apasiddhanta and goes contrary to the accepted doctrines of his
predecessors.)
नकञ्चािडिऽेत्र वाक्यानि नकनञ्चद ्नव-दधिेि नह।
िान्यभ्धरुभावंचज्जे ायादस्ते न्न शोभि॥े 15-35॥
15-35. In case he further pleads that such Vedic sentences like ‘Satyam
Jnanam Anantam Brahma’ do not voice any attributes in the Monistic
(Akhanda) Brahman but only speak of the absence of such qualities as
insentience and the like, it is not graceful to him.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 249

अभाव-भावस्यभावाद ्भाव-रपस्य िस्य ि।ु
भावाभाव-नवशषेाणामभावादनवशनेषणाः॥15-36॥
15-36. His Brahman who is accredited to be a positive entity can never be of
the nature (Swarupa) of Abhava-Rupa dharmas like Asatyatwa, Abhava
(absence of untruth) and others; neither can his Brahman possess them
(Asatyatwa-Abhava etc.) as his characteristic properties since He is totally
devoid of attributes (Nirvishesha – Nirdharmaka) either positive or negative.
रो वदे-वनेदिार्ाि
य
ांनित्य-सत्यं ाग-सश्रं वी।
वदे-बाह्यो नवपनश्चनद्भरषे निश्चीरिांििाः॥15-37॥
15-37. Let the wise decide to declare the Mayavadin as inimical to the Vedas
(Avaidika) since he has unflinchingly sworn to relinquish once for all, the
eternal verities propounded by the Vedas (like Brahma’s infinite perfections,
his being devoid of defects, reality of the world etc.) as unreal.
ज्यारसो दूषणिेव
ै
धिूम्म
य
न्योऽनप दूनषिाः।
पक्षरोरनवशषेत्वादिरोाः सद-्नवपक्षरोाः॥15-38॥
15-38. The Mayavadin who thinks himself to be shrewd enough stands
confuted along with his mighty ally, the Shunyavadin (who is already
controverted) as there is no significant difference between the two doctrines,
adverse to the virtuous.
असत्वानदत्यसौ हेिरनसद्धो ब्रह्म ु -वानदिाः।
मनेि भाडरनवशषेत्वादिे रोब्रह्म
य -शन्यू रोाः॥15-39॥
15-39. The Mayavadin claiming to be a Brahma-Vadin asserts that the
Dwaitin’s ground of inference (hetu) ‘of being unreal’, cannot be the cause of
the universe applicable to the Shunyavadin, does not pari-passu apply to
him since he accepts the reality of Brahman unlike his brother Shunyavadin.
Even then he stands not vindicated, there being no differentiating quality
between his Brahman and (Shunyavadin’s) Shunya.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 250

सोऽङ्गीकरोनि चिे स् त्त्वंब्रह्मणाः स्याद ्नवशनेषिा।
ि चिे प्र्ाप्तंपानरशष्ये ादसत्त्वंि निरस्यि॥ु 15-40॥
15-40. In case the Mayavadin welcomes the reality of Brahman to
demarcate himself from the Shunyavadin; he invites the fallacy of
Apasiddhanta (erroneous conclusion) as his attributeless Brahman
(Nirdharmaka) will possess the quality ‘Satwa’ (reality). If he chooses to be
faithful to his tenet (of attributelessness), then he cannot ward of unreality to
Brahman which embraces him by the process of elimination.
नवगीिंि नवचार
ं
स्याि ि् भाव्यंि फल-प्रदम।्
शन्यू ंब्रह्माद्यमिैिंनवनध-धी-गोचरो ि रि॥्15-41॥
ि-पष्पु वदिडित्वाद ्व्यनिनरक्तं निदशि
य
म।्
प्रमाणानदवनदत्यवेमहूिीरंरर्नेििम॥्15-42॥
15-41/42. Moreover the Tatwas upheld by the rival contestants (Mayavadin’s
Brahman, Shunyavadin’s Shunya, Sphotavadin’s Sphota, etc.) being not
existing realities possessing characteristic properties of their own, being
totally inconceivable like the imaginary sky-flower do not deserve to be
enquired into, meditated upon nor do they yield the cherished objectives to
the aspirants, whereas the Brahman of the Dwaitins, is an existent reality
replete with infinite auspicious qualities worthy of investigation and
contemplation showering the desired fruits on its devotees. Similarly all real
objects (Prathamavidhi-Buddhi Gochara) sensed as positive entities can
only be conceived and thought upon as Pramana and Prameya.
आम्नारिाममाित्वेधमाध
य
रेप्रमाणिा।
धमाद्य
य
भावेिो मािंप्रत्यक्षक
ै-प्रमानणिाः॥15-43॥
15-43. If the validity of the Vedas is not consented to, then there will be no
mode of proof to know the supersensous objects like Dharma. The open
sceptic Charvaka, who recognizes perception as the only instrument of
knowledge, will not have any other means except Vedas to prove the nonexistence of Dharma.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 251

ि पौरुषरेंवचिंप्रामाडरिे नवनिनश्चिम।्
पौरुषरेत्विो रिद ्वाक्यमन्मु त्त-भानषिम॥्15-44॥
15-44. The statements of a human being cannot be believed to be binding in
case of objects beyond the cognizance of senses like Dharma since mortals
lack perfection and their statements may prove to be invalid like the ravings
of the insane.
(It does not suffice if Pourusheya (man-made) Shastras alone are accepted
in total rejection of (Apourusheya) eternal Vedas to prove the existence of
super-sensuous objects like Dharma and God.)
नवमिाः परुुषोऽज्ाः स्याि स्य् ाच्चासौ नवप्रलाकाः।
पिंु ाच्चत्र
ै
वनदत्यस्ता सवज्
य ेकेवलािमुा॥15-45॥
15-45. When the learned one in question is likely to be ignorant and/or
deceitful, any attempt to prove his omniscience on the strength of reasoning
alone will be rejected as in the case of Chaitra.
(It is not possible to take for granted the wisdom or honesty of any individual
on the basis of reasoning alone without the corroboration of the Vedas since
every argument can have an equally strong counter-argument.)
दाःिाकरोनि रद ्दव
ैंदाःशािषेग्र आग्रहाः ू ।
दाःिाकरोऽनि-घोराः स्याल्लोकोऽिस्तििांध्रवु
ाः॥15-46॥
15-46. Inveterate obstinacy of faith in doctrines inimical to the recognized
Vedas will not only lead its adherents to an erroneous conception of Godhead but as a natural corollary pave their path to horrid hell.
(The safest and the surest way to understand the Almighty is to trust the
Vedas without demur.)
अस्माकेऽपनेक्षिेपक्षेमोक्षंदद्यादधोक्षजाः।
रत्र स्वािनन्दिाः सन्ताः सवेन्तेनवषराि ब्हूि॥्15-47॥
15-47. On the ardent followers of the Dwaita-philosophy firmly rooted in
Vedas and scriptures, Lord Vishnu bestows salvation, the highest objective
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 252

where the virtuous enjoy their innate bliss and also experience supramundane enjoyments of life.
स्व-व्याहत्यानदिोपक्ष्ये ा मनुक्तरा
यनिनवश
य नेषिा।
कदत्ये ाद्यिरुोगऽेस्या नवशषेाः स्यान्नित्तू र॥े 15-48॥
15-48. Mayavadin’s conception of the final beatitude being of the nature of
attributeless Brahman (Brahma-Bhava) deserves to be ignored by the
discreet since any reply to question relating to (Moksha) endows his final
release with an attribute to vitiate his doctrine and further disgraces him by
making him face fallacies like self-contradiction or anukti, a point of defeat of
being hushed into silence.
अनप बद्ध्यु ानद-रनहिाः परुुषार्ी ि सवर्
य
ा।
निनिलाि-ुभवाभावाि प्त्तुळीका-परुोगवि॥्15-49॥
15-49. The liberated soul bereft of mind and other organs will also be devoid
of experience internal and external and will never attain the cherished goal
of salvation like wooden dolls and such other objects.
ज्ाि-प्ररत्-वाञ्चावािीशो ि ह्यशभुंभजिे ।्
स्व-सामथ्यि
े
ििेव
ै
िंच कुराि
य
स् िादृशम॥्15-50॥
15-50. Ishwara endowed with knowledge, desire and effort is immune from
anything inauspicious like misery and can with his omnipotence endue the
loyal-liberated with qualities only propitious and ward of their undesirable
evil.
(If so, how can the released soul be devoid of auspicious qualities endowed
by God and court evil like ignorance?)
दाःि-व्याप्तंसिु ंबद्धेदृष्ट्वामक्तुेनिरस्यिा।
स्वरपंच निरस्यिे शन्यू -वादी िदा भविे॥्15-51॥
15-51. If the disputant does not welcome unalloyed bliss to the saved souls
in heaven, putting them on par with those in earthly existence where joy
jostles with grief, then the same logic will force him to forbid even Form to
the liberated beings and thus enlink him with his brother Shunyavadin.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 253

(To the disputant, Swarupa (form) exists along with joy and grief in terrestrial
existence. Hence he deprives freed souls of form also, being apprehensive
that he will have to admit pleasure and pain along with form.)
िि-ुनव-प्रनिपन्नाः स्यादूनमम
य
ाि द्हे-वत्विाः।
चत्र
ैो रर्त्ये पुानधाः स्याि ि्त्र चाशद्धु-दनेहिा॥15-52॥
15-52. The Vaisheshika argues that if the liberated person is to have
intelligence he must possess a body and if he is to be embodied he will have
to contain the six infirmities like birth.
The Dwaitin points out that the disputant blissfully forgets that the embodied
soul in salvation will assume a god-like form of the nature of knowledge and
bliss free from infirmities and not possess an impure one like that of Chaitra
as in earthly existence.
अिैकानन्तक-िा हेिोदह
े-वत्त्वादधीनशिाः
ु।
सोऽदहेश्चदेनिच्छानदभव
य
च्छे श-नवषाणवि॥्15-53॥
15-53. His logic ‘He who has body suffers from foibles’ is not valid because it
suffers from the fallacy of inconclusiveness since Ishwara has a body and is
untouched by blemishes and further if God is disembodied, he will go without
knowledge and desires and be Asat (unreal) like the horn of hare.
(Just as the supreme possesses a body rid of defects, the released soul
likewise will have an unearthly purified body.)
ज्ात्रानद-रपमस्य स्याद ्वल
ै
क्षडरार चिे ि्िाः।
िदवे दहे-शब्दोक्तं ि ह्यसौ प्राकृिाकृनिाः॥15-54॥
15-54. If the opponent, to distinguish Ishwara from the horn of a hare
assigns to Ishwara the form of a knower or desirer, it is tantamount to admit
the Dwaitin’s stand, that Ishwara is embodied and that his body is supernal
of the form of knowledge and bliss (and not an earthly one full of dross like
that of Chaitra).
एवंस्वरप-दहेत्वंमक्तु स्याप्यरुरीकृिम।्
िानिष्ट-भोगस्तिे स्याि प्र्ाकृि-क्षत्रे-सावाः॥15-55॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 254

15-55. So one has to accept a natural form, a body constituted of knowledge
and bliss like Ishwara, to those who have attained salvation and hence free
from agony that is ingrained in the muddy vesture of decay (mortal body).
(Hence the liberated enjoy unalloyed, abundant pleasure.)
नवमिो िावरववाि न्विानशत्व-प्रसङ्गिाः।
पटवच्चदेवरवा निरस्यन्तऽेत्र कीदृशााः॥15-56॥
15-56. If it is so inferred that the released soul, the moot topic, has no limbs
because they are subject to decay like a piece of cloth, the Dwaitin
questions the disputant as to what kind of limbs he refutes.
नसद्ध-साधििा हेिोस्तेनभन्नाश्चदेनचन्मरााः।
आत्मिो भदे-रनहिा एष्टव्या एव वानदनभाः॥15-57॥
15-57. In case the limbs declined by him are of a gross form different from
the natural body of the freed soul, then the inference suffers from the fallacy
of proving what is already accepted (Siddha Sadhana), palatable to the
Dwaitin. Otherwise he too, has to welcome spiritual limbs, the constituents of
a natural body of pure intelligence.
परमाडवानद-दशे षे ुव्याप्त्य
ै
व्यामानदकेष्वनप।
रर्ाऽऽत्मिाः प्रदशे ााः स्यस्तु षेांिोऽवरवास्तर्ा ॥15-58॥
15-58. Let the Vaisheshika realise that the Dwaitin vests with
undifferentiated supernal limbs to the souls liberated just as (the
Vaisheshika) accedes undifferentiated parts (limbs) in places like Vyam (one
full stretch with both arms) and atoms, dryads and triads to prove pervasion
to Jivatman or Paramatman.
मक्तु ो रपानद-नवि स् त्वाज्जिान्यत्वेसिीशवि।्
दृष्टान्तोऽसाध्य-नवकलस्तस्य सवज्
य
िाग्रहाि॥्15-59॥
15-59. The Dwaitin advances his argument: The emancipated person, being
of the nature of the sentient (spiritual essence) different from the insentient,
is gifted with knowledge (of Form and the like, driving home the natural
corollary of the acceptance of sense organs too, to the freed soul) and the
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 255

illustration (Ishwara) does not succumb to the fallacy of Sadhya-Vaikalya
(the absence of the thing to be proved) as Ishwara is recognized to be
omniscient by all disputants.
ईश्वरो ि सिु ी ििे रपाद्यिभुवन्ननप।
दाःि-प्रसङ्गानदनि मा वानद िद-्व्यानप्त-दूषणाि॥्15-60॥
11-60. He further alerts the disputant not to avow that Ishwara though
endued with the knowledge of Form and the like, is not endowed with
happiness because he will have to taste unhappiness also, since the
pervasion of pleasure and pain has already been denied.
दृष्टान्तो रस्य िष्टेोऽरंिस्य स्याद ्व्यनिरके वाि।्
नशलावनदत्यिाः शद्धु-नचद-्दहेेनन्द्रर-भोग्रसौ॥15-61॥
15-61. To those contestants (like Bhattas) reluctant to receive this example
(Ishwara), the Dwaitin extends the example of logical discontinuance
(Vyatireki Anumana):
‘The beings void of knowledge of Form and the like are as stones different
from the sentient and thereby he (Dwaitin) asserts that the released souls
possess a pure natural body and sense organs too, to enjoy delight’s divine.’
स्वािन्द-नवषरेमोक्षेवदेोक्तेरनुक्त-सानधि।े
िेषोऽरंवानदिांकस्माि ि् द-्नवरुद्धऽेर्वाऽऽग्रहाः॥15-62॥
15-62. Why do the contestants spurn that salvation, teeming with innate
bliss, sanctioned by scriptures and confirmed by logic and willfully insist on
an unpleasant type of liberation antithetic to the one (upheld by the Dwaitin)?
ििाः स्विाः प्रमाणिे दवेो वदेिे वनेदिाः।
नवष्णमुोक्षस्य दािनेि नवश्वंभवनि शोभिम॥्15-63॥
15-63. Once we all realise that Lord Vishnu, full of auspicious attributes, so
propagated by the self-evident Vedas is the dispenser of salvation, ‘all will
be well with the world’.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 256

इत्यादीि द्शर
य
न्त्यर्ाि
य
व्य् ाख्योपन्यास-सरं िुा।
नत्र-नवक्रमारण
े
िदा नवश्वानभज्स्य शश्रुवु॥े 15-64॥
15-64. Trivikramacharya listened attentively to the learned discourses of the
Acharya vigorously advocating such solid statements.
अर् प्रारिु नवनवधाि ब्ोध-चाप-गणुनेरिाि।्
नवपक्ष-रक्तु ाि व्ीरण
े
िीक्ष्णास्तं क
य-शरािसौ॥15-65॥
15-65. Then took place (an unprecedented controversy) where
Trivikramacharya (the proponent of Adwaita) an intellectual giant,
marshalled with immense dexterity sharp shafts of hard logic released from
his bow-string of knowledge, to pull down Madhwacharya.
नचच्छेदािच्छु -नधषणस्तास्तं दा िक
य-सारकैाः।
प्ररक्तु मात्राि प्र्-हसि ल् ीलराऽनि-शरालुनभाः॥15-66॥
15-66. Anumanatirtha blessed with greater intellectual trenchancy pared off
the acute arrows of reasoning with a pleasing smile, no sooner they were
discharged (then and there) by the adversary (Trivikramacharya) with
chasing counter-replies, with wonderful ease.
अधाराण
य ीिर-जिर
ैनिवत्यानय
ि परुूषाः
ै।
नवनजगीषनुिज
ि -श्रष्ठेो वदेािानण प्ररक्तु वाि॥्15-67॥
15-67. When logic failed him, Trivikramacharya the elite of the Brahmins,
hoping to vanquish the great Acharya, in a desperate attempt hurled the
baffling Vedic missiles in the form of intractable Vedic sentences hard to
confront and onerous to be borne by the ineligibles.
वाक्यैरनि-बलीरोनभाः प्रत्यिैनरव वैनदकैाः।
अर्ान्त
य
रंप्रकटरि ि्ान्यसौ सन्न्यविर
य
ि॥्15-68॥
15-68. Sarvajnacharya reacted squarely and rendered Trivikramacharya’s
missiles sterile directing them to a different aim (by interpreting the Vedic
sentences in a different way and substantiating them) by his counter-
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 257

missiles (in the form of) distinct copious Vedic sentences more virile, to
defeat the disputant on his own ground.
सप्ताष्टानि नदिान्यवेंवादंकृत्वा सहामिुा।
निरुत्तरंिंनिश्चोद्यंचक्रेचक्रारधु-नप्रराः॥15-69॥
15-69. After an engaging intellectual skirmish that prolonged for a fortnight,
Madhwacharya dearest to Lord Narayana totally disarmed the stalwart
Trivikramacharya so much so, that he could neither dare reply nor shoot
further questions.
प्रणम्याऽचष्ट नशष्टोऽसौ क्षम्यिांिार् चापलम।्
पद-पद्म-रजो-दास्यंध्रवुंमेदीरिानमनि॥15-70॥
15-70. The (discomfited) Trivikramacharya, being an enlightened soul lay
prostrate before Poornaprajna in total surrender and humbly prayed ‘Lord,
forgive the agility of my tongue that lanced clap-trap and grant eternal
servitude of the dust of thy blessed feet’.
व्याख्यांभाष्यस्य भरूो-धीाः श्रवणंसनूर-िन्दिाः।
सन्ताः प्रीनिमसन्तोऽन्यांसममारनेभरेििाः॥15-71॥
15-71. Then Poornaprajna (the Ideal Guru) commenced his learned
discourses on Brahmasutra Bhashya and the erudite disciple (the Ideal
Pupil) heeded; the virtuous delighted and the vicious despised
coincidentally.
(The good people were happy to have Trivikramacharya in their fold while
the wicked were unhappy to lose him.)
गवुाज्
य
ा-गौरवाट्टीकांकुवि
य
भ्ाष्यस्य दष्कराम।्
षिध-यनवक्रमारोऽसौ महाचारम
य
भाषि॥15-72॥
15-72. With due deference to the behest of his preceptor, Trivikramacharya
undertook the trying task of writing Tatwapradipa, a learned commentary on
Brahmasutra Bhashya and spoke to the Great Acharya thus:
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 258

कवीन्द्रि
ै य
समाप्यन्तेसङ्गृह्यानप रिोऽनिशम।्
न्यार-रत्ानि भाष्याब्धरेस्य गााीरम
य
द्बि
ु
म॥्15-73॥
15-73. Even the wisest Pundits ceaselessly gleaning the gem-like amazing
(reasonings) embedded in the sea of your Bhashya, have not succeeded to
drain it completely; so astonishing is its depth and solemnity!
दशोपनिषदो दवेीाः दवेा इव समीनििााः।
रक्तु ााः प्रसादरन्त्यर्ा
य
एष ुभाष्यालरष्वे लम॥्15-74॥
15-74. Unlike other Upanishad Bhashyas where words are divorced from
their meanings (to our dire distress) in the mansion of the UpanishadBhashya of Madhwacharya, the imposing words, (the Gods) and the lofty
meanings, (the Goddess) move in close unison and jostle with jubilation
bringing out precisely the beauty of their weighty thoughts like the ladies
being pleased by their lords in their lovely lodgings.
गीिा-िात्र-य
भाष्याभ्ामाभ्ांनवश्वंप्रकाश्रि।े
गो-गणर
ै
प्रिीकारर
ै
क
ेन्दभ्ानमवानधकम॥्15-75॥
15-75. The irrevocable matter contained in Geeta-Bhashya and GeetaTatparya, glosses of the Acharya on Bhagavad-Gita, highlight the congeries
of Dwaita tenets like the rays of the sun and the moon illumining the world.
इनिहास-परुाणाब्धभे व
य नच्चत्तार्द्ी-लोनळिाि।्
जािांभारि-िात्र-य
सधुांकाः सन्न सवेि॥े 15-76॥
15-76. Is there any righteous person who will not honor and enjoy the
ambrosia - Tatparya Nirnaya volume of the Acharya (that distills the
essence of the epics and the puranas) arisen from the churning of the
ocean, of the huge heap of epics and puranas with his mind the Mandara
Mountain?
परुाण-स्थाि-पािािामभाषा-त्रर-वनेदिाम।्
भविा स-ुसिा चक्रेश्री-भागवि-निणर
य
ाः॥15-77॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 259

15-77. There is no better companion than Bhagawata Tatparya Nirnaya
volume of the Acharya which unlocks the secrets of Puranas for those who
plod the Purana path (field) without competence in the three types of
languages. (Guhya, Darshana and Samadhi)
कस्तन्त्र-सारंसम्प्राप्य ि स्याि प्राप्त
य -वानञ्चिाः।
अमरैरानश्रि-च्छारंकल्प-र्द्ु
मनमवोत्तमम॥्15-78॥
15-78. Having assimilated Acharya’s Tantrasara, (digest of excellent rituals)
acceptable even to the Gods, who will not have his wishes wholly fulfilled,
which is like Kalpataru (wish-yielding tree) whose shade shelters even the
celestials.
लोकािामवलोकार मागस्य
य
ास्य व्यधाद ्भवाि।्
करुणाकर ित्रेाभेवाद-सन्माि-लक्षण॥े 15-79॥
15-79. Oh Great Acharya, endowed with mercy transcendental! You wrote
Pramana Lakshana and Katha Lakshana which serve as models for people
(eyes for people to see) that catalogue the characteristics of valid
reasonings and master-debates.
एकाकी नकल रश्चक्रेपदंमौनलष ुनव-निषाम।्
ित्व-निणर
य -पार्ोऽरंकेि िाम ि पज्यू ि॥े 15-80॥
15-80. By whom is not Vishnu Tatwa-Nirnaya (Acharya’s elaborate prose
masterpiece representing the methodology of Dwaita dialectic) worshipped,
as it alone can discomfit the rival confutants like the non-pareil archer
Arjuna. (Who could rout the enemies single-handed in the Uttaragograhana
fight?)
वादादराः प्रकरण-स्फुनलङ्गास्तिवोऽप्यलम।्
नवपक्ष-कक्षंनक्षडवनन्त मारुििे त्वरनेरिााः॥15-81॥
15-81. The unrivalled monographs (including Tatwodyota and others)
composed by you, the incarnation of Lord Vayu, though slender in size can
in strength outwit the hostile doctrines, like the tiny sparks of fire ablaze with
the blow of wind razing an arid forest.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 260

अिन्तोऽर्ाः
य प्रकनटििराऽणौ भाष्य-सङ्ग्रहे।
अहो आत्म-पनरज्प्त्यैकृष्णिेवेाऽििान्तर॥े 15-82॥
15-82. Your concise compendium, Brahmasutra-Anubhashya that manifests
myriad meanings is indeed a literary miracle to highlight a moiety of your
might like the universe displayed in the small mouth of Lord Krishna.
(Anubhashya was composed at the instance of Achuthapreksha for
recitation, especially on the Dwadashi (twelfth) day)
भगवनंश्चत्र-कनविांलौनककीं दशर
य
ि न्कल।
गोप्यंभारि-सिेपमकृिा नवश्व-नवस्मरम॥्15-83॥
15-83. Oh Glorious Acharya, your Yamaka-Bharata which synoptically
surveys the mysterious Mahabharata with its epic dimension in a few
stanzas pin-points your astonishing poetic talent and stands unrivalled in the
whole range of Sanskrit literature.
िािा-सभुानषि-स्तोत्र-गार्ानद-कृ नि-सत्कृिीाः।
त्वनर रत्ाकरेरत्-श्रनेणवा
य
गणरनन्त के॥15-84॥
15-84. Who can reckon your distinguished works of art including your
renowned pithy maxims, hymns of praise and religious verses like the cluster
of emeralds at the bottom of the sea?
एष ुदभ्र-मिीि द्भ्राि ह्सत्यच्चु
ाः
ै
सिांसभा।
नचन्तामणींनश्चन्तरन्ती नमिािप्यनमिार्द
य
ाि॥्15-85॥
15-85. The council of the wise admire and adore your writings that are
pregnant with varied meanings that can be compared to the philosopher’s
stone (the fabulous gem chintamani) capable of yielding all desired objects
(purusharthas) and laugh at the dull-witted who try to ignore them for their
tenuity in bulk.
अपरोऽपीष्यिऽेस्मानभग्रि
य
ष्वे िे षे ुसत्स्वनप।
सत्स्वपीन्द्रानदष ुपरुा िारकानरनरवामराः
ै॥15-86॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 261

15-86. Trivikramacharya implored: ‘With all this wealth of wisdom at our
command, we yet yearn for another volume, like the divines entreating the
Almighty for another powerful god (Skanda) for the destruction of the demon
Taraka with mighty gods like Indra in their phalanx.
ग्रिभ्े एभ्ोऽगाधभ्े ो रक्तु रो िो दरुद्धरााः।
मिो-मान्द्याि ि्िो ग्रिंव्यक्त-िक
य-िनिंकुरु॥15-87॥
15-87. Dull-witted as we are, it is hard to pick and choose the appropriate
reasonings from your extensive tough and profound works. It will be
extremely kind of you if you compose another work of art to muster and
manifest your master-reasonings in a limpid manner.
इत्यनर्ि
य ो व्यधान्मध्वाः सोऽि-ुव्याख्यांसिांसधुाम।्
दवानय
द-गवानय
र्द्-पनवंमानर-ध्वान्त-रनव-द्यनुिम॥्15-88॥
15-88. So solicited, Acharya Madhwa composed his Magnum-opus
Anuvyakhyana, blissful like ambrosia to the virtuous and frightful as the
thunder-bolt to the mountain of super-arrogance of the vile confutants and
lustrous like the Sun to wipe out the ignorance spread by the Mayavadins.
रगुपद ्रचरन्निेांकदानचि स् निरन्तरम।्
चिरुश्चिरु
ाः नशष्याि ल् ीलराऽलेिरि ि् लु॥15-89॥
15-89. Once Sarvajnacharya composed at one stretch the whole of
Anuvyakhyana and got its four chapters transcribed simultaneously by four
discreet disciples without pause and with extreme case. (A marvelous feat,
indeed in inspirational and intellectual gymnastics.)
(Perhaps a suggestion of the Acharya being Chaturmukha Brahma citing the
Vedas with his four mouths all at once.)
रक्तु ारा रनुक्त-मालारााः प्रोक्तारास्तत्र चाऽत्मिा।
व्यक्तं चक्रेनववरणंकवीन्द्रर
ै
षे दष्करम॥्15-90॥
15-90. To elucidate the right reasonings (narrated) in the Yuktimala - portion
of Anuvyakhyana, Poornaprajna wrote another book called Nyayavivarana,
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 262

one more literary achievement impossible to be accomplished even by
accredited scholars.
मध्वन्दे ोनित्य
य -सम्बन्दाि न्िस्तमस्ताप-चिेसोाः।
वक
ै
ु
डठं रािरोाः नपत्रोाः गहेेऽस्यावरजोऽवसि॥्15-91॥
15-91. Freed from ignorance and distress and endowed with accumulated
merit because of their intimate association with their beloved son
Madhwacharya pleasing as the moon, the blessed parents of
Madhwacharya attained the world of bliss Vaikunta, leaving behind their
younger son Vishnutirtha in their residence at Pajaka-Kshetra.
नवनध-भ्रू-नवभ्रम-भ्रश्रद-्धि-गो-धान्य-सम्पदा।
निवने
दिा वदे-नवदा ििेाऽपेवदे-वानद-राट॥् 15-92॥
15-92. Vishnutirtha well-versed in Vedas, with the loss of his assets, money,
grain and cows with the freak of fortune (sportive movement of the eyebrows of Fate) attained vairagya (freedom from worldly attachments) and
hied to his brother Madhwacharya, the unsurpassed interpreter of the
Vedas.
पानर-व्राज्यंप्रार्र
य
न्तंपादािम्रनममंमहुु
ाः।
समरापक्षे रोवीक्षो गमरामास धाम िम॥्15-93॥
15-93. Vishnutirtha beseeching the Great Acharya with repeated prostrations
for initiation, to join the ascetic fold was sent back home being persuaded by
Poornaprajna to await the auspicious day (the completion of Chaturmasya),
(with an assurance to fulfil his wishes).
ि जघास ि सष्वु ाप ि जहास स धीर-धीाः।
समरानर्
य
स्मरि ज्य् ष्ठेंरामंरामािजु ो रर्ा॥15-94॥
15-94. Accordingly Vishnutirtha, with an established mind and a stead-fast
resolve, plunged in the fondest recollections of Madhwacharya, neither ate
nor slept nor laughed but anxiously awaited the dawn of the propitious
moment (when he would be raised to the order of the monk) like the Chataka
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 263

bird awaiting for the shower and like Bharata expecting the arrival of his
brother Lord Ramachandra after his exile.
राज्येकर्नञ्चि स् स्थं ाप्य राजािंनवरहानदि
ि
म।्
अविार-भवुंप्राराद ्भगवाि श् रदत्यर॥े 15-95॥
15-95. With the turn of the Autumn season (after the Chaturmasya)
Madhwacharya at last arrived (as promised) to the land of his birth (PajakaKshetra) having succeeded in persuading king Jayasimha intending to
escort the Acharya to avoid intolerable separation from him, to stay on in his
kingdom (observing his Dharma of protecting his subjects).
नवशद्धु-नि-कुलंश्रौिंशनुचंकृि-नपिृ-नक्ररम।्
नवरक्तं नवषराि भ् क्त्वु ा व्यधान्मध्वोऽिजु ंरनिम॥्15-96॥
15-96. Madhwacharya inducted, his meritorious brother-disciple, born of
parents of a noble lineage soaked in Vedic lore, sacred to the core, leading
an impassioned life after life’s little enjoyments and commanding all other
requisite excellences, into the ascetic order after the completion of the
preliminary religious rites (like Pitru-Shraddha and Jiva-Shraddha).
रहस्यनि-रहस्यंिद ्ब्रह्म ब्रह्म-समो ददौ।
अमष्मु
ै
पञ्च-िपसो ि नवदरि
य
ि्पनस्विाः॥15-97॥
15-97. Madhwacharya, the incarnation of Lord Vayu equal in cadre to
Chaturmukha Brahma, in seclusion imparted to his esteemed disciple
Vishnutirtha supreme esoteric secrets of Parabrahma-tatwa unknown even
by anchorites engaged in rigorous austerities among the Panchagnis (the
five Fires).
प्रमेामिृ -प्रसन्नास्य-नस्मिाङ्गापाङ्ग-पवूक
य
म।्
श्री-नवष्ण-ुिीर्-यिामास्मै प्रीनि-िीर्ाः
य
प्र-दत्तवाि॥्15-98॥
15-98. Prititirtha, with a pleased countenance (full of the nectar of love)
decked with a pleasant smile and a gracious side-glance named the monk
(his brother) as Vishnutirtha.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 264

श्रवणिेािवुादिे मिििेाविृ ाऽकरोि।्
कालं वदेान्त-शािस्य वदेान्त-गरुु-सोदराः॥15-99॥
15-99. Vishnutirtha an ardent follower of his brother Madhwacharya, the
master-expositor of the scriptures, made gainful use of the time in listening
to the lectures of his preceptor (Acharya Madhwa) and in repeating,
cogitating and contemplating over them.
स दानन्त-भनक्त-माधरु-य
पनरचरानय
द-मदेराः
ै।
महा-नवटनपिंचक्रेगरुोाः स्वस्थंकृपाङ्कुरम॥्15-100॥
15-100. The sprout of grace sown in Vishnutirtha by Anandatirtha blossomed
into a full-fledged tree, nourished by his (Vishnutirtha’s) rich manure of
sense-restraints, sincere devotion to Lord Narayana and Acharya Madhwa,
winning talk and sweet decorum allied with loyal service to the preceptor.
अिन्त-मनि-कारुडर-कल्प-र्द्ु
म-विो जिैाः।
आवडरो मनहमा िस्य लौल्याि स् वं डरि
य ेमिाक॥् 15-101॥
15-101. It is hard to depict the glory of Vishnutirtha, (one among the
fortunate few) sheltered under the Kalpavriksha (wish-yielding tree) of
Acharya’s divine mercy. Yet out of ardent desire, a few of his miracles are
here delineated.
चिरुोऽसौ प्र-वचिेमि-ुस-ं नसनद्धमाि मिाः ् ।
सङ्ख्या मांपरूणी मा गान्मध्व-दासनमनि व्यधाि॥्15-102॥
15-102. Expert in discourses, fully accomplished in sacred Mantras (Pranava
and others) Vishnutirtha firmly resolved to be second to none but to top the
list of the devoted disciples of Acharya Madhwa.
नदशंप्ररािंशनशि-श्चरन्तंपरश
य ोधरि।्
िीर्-ं
कं नवष्ण-ुिीर्
ं
च नवष्ण-ुिीर्श्च
य
िीर्-य
कम॥्15-103॥
15-103. During his holy journey towards the north, the dips in holy waters
purified Vishnutirtha and such is the glory of the great that their ablution in
turn, sanctifies the sacred waters.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 265

अकामािामिकेेशांनसनद्ध-भनूमंिपनस्विाम।्
निरोनहिात्मा प्रापासौ हनरश्चन्द्र-महीधरम॥्15-104॥
15-104. Vishnutirtha moved to the Harishchandra Mountain in an invisible
form, the land of perfection where reside the inspired sages, shorn of worldly
desires.
िन्द्व-दाःिािलेवीरो मात्सरण
े नव-मत्सराः।
ित्याज मत्वा िस्यासावशिादीधिानरिम॥्15-105॥
105. The brave Vishnutirtha bereft of jealously but envious of the vicious fire
of grief born of life’s duals (pain and pleasure), gave up food and edibles lest
it would add fuel to the fire.
भक्त
ै
रि-ुनगरंिीिंप्रानर्ि
य ो रनि-शिे राः।
पञ्चगव्यंपपौ नकनञ्चि प्ञ्चम-ेपञ्चमेनदि॥े 15-106॥
106. Solicited by his devotees, Vishnutirtha the eminent anchorite drank a
driblet of panchagavya (a purifying portion) brought by them near the
mountain, once in five days.
स त्यजि स् ाहसी िच्च िपस्तपेऽेनि िापसम।्
नबल्व-पणाः
ैनक्षिौ पन्यस्त
ै नृप्तमाि ्सनललर
ैनप॥15-107॥
15-107. Vishnutirtha who had conquered his senses, gradually relinquished
the Panchagavya also and remained content with Bilva leaves dropped on
the ground and later with mere water such being the rigour of his austerities
difficult to be practiced even by celebrated sages.
रर्ष्टेमध्यास्त नशलांरमी स-ुनिरमी स िाम।्
िाऽध्यासिेरामके ाहं दव
ै-भग्नास्तपनस्विाः॥15-108॥
15-108. Vishnutirtha who had mastered his senses and strictly observed his
saintly routine, squatted comfortably on a particular (icy-cold) stone and
practiced penance for long, where unfortunate hermits divorced of Lord’s
Grace would hardly suffer to sit even for a day.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 266

पविाशं ािजु ो नजत्वा पविंरचे कानदनभाः।
नवषरभ्े ो हृषीकाश्वाि म् िो-रन्त्रा समाहरि॥्15-109॥
15-109. Sri Vishnutirtha, the younger brother of the Acharya, the incarnation
of Lord Vayu, achieved the conquest of breath by Pranayama (a process of
inhalation, exhalation and suspension of breath) and subdued his senses
with drawing the sense-horses from the mundane tinsels with his competent
mind-charioteer.
स्मरि म् रुाररेाकारं दध्यावध्यात्म-कोनवदाः।
समानधमानध-शमिंरोनग-लभ्ंस लब्धवाि॥्15-110॥
5-110. Sri Vishnutirtha steeped in sacred lore contemplated on the form of
Lord Narayana as directed by his revered preceptor and attained Samadhi.
(Perfect absorption of thought into the supreme spirit) by the yogic process
that ‘Plucks from the memory the rooted sorrow’.
मौकुन्देसन्दु रेरपेस्वािन्दानद-गणुाणव
य ।े
स्वाश्चर-य
रत्ेमग्नात्मा िान्यि न्कनञ्चद ्नववदे साः॥15-111॥
5-111. Contemplating on the exquisite form of Mukunda (dispenser of
Moksha), the wonder of wonders, the treasure of infinite auspicious qualities
like Ananda, fully free from faults. Sri Vishnutirtha attained Asamprajnata
Samadhi. (Completely lost himself in meditation so much so that he became
unaware of the outer phenomena.)
काम-त्रास-नवहीिस्य िस्य स-ुज्ाि-चक्षषु
ाः।
नविा कैवल्य-साम्राज्यंिाघो रोग-मणरेभिू॥्15-112॥
15-112. (The gem of) chaste and deep meditation of Sri Vishnutirtha
unsoiled by desires of future fruition and endowed with intellectual vision
(resulting in Asamprajnata Samadhi) was worth its (value) in nothing less
than the kingdom of eternal bliss (Moksha).
मध्वािजु ेमध्व-िार्ो रंप्रसादंव्यधाि ि् दा।
स नचत्तानवषर-त्वाद ्वा गोप्य-त्वाद ्वा ि वडरि
य ॥े 15-113॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 267

15-113. The munificence of grace granted by Lord Narayana, the master of
Madhwacharya, to his (Madhwacharya’s) beloved brother Vishnutirtha, being
of a mysterious nature, unintelligible even to the elites, beggars description
(cannot be fully delineated).
अहो महा-बोध-सवेा-मनहमाऽनस्मि र्गु ेरिाः।
धन्योऽसौ नसनद्धमापमेांसोऽमरैनरत्यलाळ्रि॥15-114॥
15-114. ‘Indeed such is the glory of the service to Anandatirtha whom even
Kali can never dare touch (being Akhanashma) and so blessed is
Vishnutirtha who could attain such unique accomplishment even in this Kaliage,’ – so vindicated the gods, the majesty of the dedicated service of
Vishnutirtha to the venerable Poornaprajna.
िीव्र-व्रिोऽिीनन्द्रर-नवद ्नवद्यानब्धस्तक
य-पनडििाः।
अनिरुद्ध-पदाधाराः प्रष्ठाः नशष्यस्तामा े -ररौ॥15-115॥
15-115. Saturated with learning divine, a master in dialectic, gifted with
supersensous knowledge, the dearest of his disciples called Aniruddha
Tirtha, who had observed rigorous religious vows approached Sri
Vishnutirtha, (absorbed in deep meditation on the Harishchandra Mountain).
ििे सम्प्रानर्ि
य ंरािंरप्य-पीठनममंपिु
ाः।
कृ त्स्न-ज्ंकृपरा स्वषे ुसम्प्राप्तंमनेिरेप्रजााः॥15-116॥
15-116. Indeed such was the semblance Sri Vishnutirtha bore to his brother
Madhwacharya, that on his arrival at Udupi, at the earnest entreaty of his
dear disciple Aniruddha-Tirtha, his followers felt as if Anandatirtha had
returned out of mercy to bless them.
कवीन्द्र-निलको नविच्छेिरस्तापसाग्रणीाः।
मध्व-केळी-शकु ोऽस्याभनूच्छष्यो व्यास-पदाश्रराः॥15-117॥
15-117. Badarayana Tirtha known as Vyasatirtha who had taken refuge at
the feet of Lord Vedavyasa, a celebrated poet, a distinguished scholar and a
renowned saint, dear as sporting parrot even to Anandatirtha, was another
of Vishnutirtha’s disciples.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 268

असौ दास्यंध्रवुंरािंमहान्तंमहिामनप।
व्यधादिग्रुहंकुवि
य
स् ामथ्याः
ै
कौिकुं िणृ ाम॥्15-118॥
15-118. Sri Vishnutirtha who struck wonder in the hearts of the people with
his superhuman feats fully favoured his favorite follower and with a firm
resolve made him (Vyasatirtha) the pick of the chosen wise.
आ-रुरोह दरारोहंस पराः
ै
प्रीनि-कृद्धराःे।
महान्तंमनहमािंच महीध्रंच गहु-नप्ररम॥्15-119॥
15-119. Sri Vishnutirtha, busy in activities delightful to Lord Narayana,
attained transcendent glory hard for others to gain and scaled even the lofty
mountain (Kumaradri) dear to Kumarswamy impossible for others to ascend.
आकृ ष्टोऽस्य गणुर्व्
ै
ाप्तैाः रो गोदारा उपाररौ य ।
स पद्मिाभ-िीर्ाख्य
य
ाः नशष्योऽन्योऽभिू स् -ुचिेसाः॥15-120॥
15-120. Lured by the excellences of the great Acharya that captivated the
land, the learned Padmanabhatirtha of an immaculate mind who hailed from
the Godavari tract, also joined Anandatirtha as his staunch follower.
श्रत्यु ा मत्या सदा भक्त्या नवरक्त्या नित्य-सवेरा।
रस्म
ै
प्रसन्नाः प्राज्यक्षे ाः सद्यो नवद्यांददौ शभुाम॥्15-121॥
15-121. Satisfied with the dispassionate nature, judicious listening, deep
thinking, unfaltering devotion and unstinted service of Padmanabhatirtha,
Anandatirtha imparted to him forthwith the knowledge of the supreme spirit.
वदेान्तानब्धंि रो जािुजहौ नविि-्निनमनङ्गलाः।
रनुक्त-प्रवाह-सम्रााि प्र-शाि-िदी-चराः॥15-122॥
15-122. Like the whale always moving majestically in the sea, migrating to
the river at times to swallow the small fish, (timis) Padmanabhatirtha (the
whale) of prodigious learning never forsook (was greatly devoted to) the
unbounded Shastra (ocean of Vedanta) but out of resentment ransacked the
limited scriptural content (the river only to defy and defeat the chain of
inferences of the disputants.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 269

व्याख्या-प्रणाद-मात्रणे वीरंमन्याि स्व् -मडिले।
मारावी-ग्राम-नसहं ाि र्ो वानद-नसहं ो निराकरोि।्15-123॥
15-123. Like the roar of the valiant lion frightening the craven dogs, the
distinguished controversialist Padmanabhatirtha (lion) outwitted the
Mayavadins (dogs) who deemed themselves to be impregnable among their
lot, by the thunder (resonant voice) of his spirited discourses.
मत्त-दवानय
द-मािङ्ग-िक
य-मस्तक-धारण।े
पञ्चास्यो रोऽभवद ्व्यक्तं चिरुास्योऽनप केवलम॥्15-124॥
15-124. Like the roar of the brave lion cleaving the temples of the inebriated
elephants, the vehement eloquence of Padmanabhatirtha (indeed a veritable
lion) dexterously knocked down the confusing logic of the hostile disputants.
(Elephants)
सन्न्यार-रत्ावनळरप्यदुपानद रिाः परा।
टीकाऽपराऽि-ुव्याख्यारा अिघा
य
बोध-सागराि॥्125॥
15-125. The store-house of Padmanabharitha’s sacred learning gave birth to
his volume Sanyaya Ratnavali, a surpassing commentary on Anuvyakhyana,
the magnum-opus of the Great Acharya, really a propitious and precious
gem.
वदे-प्रवचिाचार-यनशष्योऽसानवनि पनूजिाः।
सभ्ाः सभारांरो वदेंव्याचख्यौ वदे-सारनवि॥्15-126॥
15-126. Padmanabhatirtha, well grounded in the essence of the Vedas, a
grace to the assembly of the wise revered by the elite as the esteemed
disciple of Guru-Madhwacharya and the well-known expounder of the Vedic
scriptures, delivered weighty sermons to huge congregations.
अिरोाः प्रर्मेनशष्याश्चरमेचाभवनन्नह।
अिन्त-बोधस्यािकेेरिीन्द्रा बहु-दशे जााः॥15-127॥
15-127. Besides these two outstanding devoted adherents Vishnutirtha and
Padmanabhatirtha, Poornaprajna had already many celebrated monk-
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 270

disciples and admitted many more that had arrived from different directions,
later into his fold.
वशीकृ ि-हृषीकाश्च जििाद्यपु-मनदििाः।
िरनसहं -पदाधार अभ्स्तोपन्द्रे -िामकााः॥15-128॥
15-128. Amongst those, prominent were the followers called
Hrishikeshatirtha who had subdued his senses, Janardhanatirtha who had
conquered birth and death, Narasimhatirtha who took shelter in the feet of
Lord Narasimha and Upendratirtha who engrossed himself in repeating the
Lord’s name in Upendra form.
अदीघान्य
य
ानभधािा रेश्रीमर्द्ाम-पदाश्ररााः।
अप्रत्यक्ष-गणुोनर्द्क्ता भनक्त-वैराग्र-सागरााः॥15-129॥
15-129. Mention be made of others followers also, called Vamanatirtha as
though his name (reminded the dwarf-God Vamana), Ramtirtha who had
taken refuge in the feet of Lord Ramachandra and Adhokshajatirtha who
was gifted with supreme knowledge imperceptible to the senses – one and
all full of dispassion and intense devotion to Lord Narayana.
(In these two verses, we find the list of first peetadhipatis of all the eight
monasteries at Udupi (except Vishnutirtha whose greatness is already dealt
with).
पादैाः पिुन्ताः पनृर्वीं दशर
य
न्तो हराःे पदम।्
धिू-दस्समर-ध्वान्ता भास्करा इव गांगिााः॥15-130॥
15-130. These illustrious adherents of the Acharya appeared like so many
luminous Suns, come down to consecrate the earth with their holy feet,
(sacred journey thoughout the land) to manifest the nature of the supreme
and to destroy the darkness of hostile doctrines by their learned discourses,
like the Sun illuminating the sky with his radiant rays and destroying the
darkness.
मोक्ष-शािमृिााोनध-सवेरा नित्य-निविृय
ााः।
चनक्र-चारु-िराचास
य
ुचनक्रणश्चरणाचक
य
ााः॥15-131॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 271

15-131. These renowned followers led a life full of bliss plunged in the study
and contemplation of Madhwa-Shastra, the ocean of nectar that confers
salvation on its sincere votaries and in worshipping the lotus-feet of Lord
Vishnu in his different enchanting images.
मध्व प्रनशष्या बहवाः नशष्या एषांमहुुस्तर्ा।
अलञ्चक्रुरलं पथ्वृ ीं सव
े
सद-्गणु-भषूणााः॥15-132॥
15-132. These eminent disciples of the Acharya along with their several
students bedecked with sovereign qualities (like penance, dispassion,
knowledge and devotion to Lord Vishnu) greatly enriched the whole world.
सदा सकल-सच्छाि-व्याख्या-सौख्यामृिानब्ध-गााः।
सव
े
दवानय
द-दवाद
य -काडि-िडिि-मडििााः॥15-133॥
15-133. All these votaries, all the while in their salutary sermons on the bliss
-yielding Shastra derived deep delight comparable to a few sips from the sea
of ambrosia and graced themselves by controverting the fallacious
reasonings of the rival confutants.
भनूर-भनक्त-भरााः केनचदष्वे ल्प-श्रिु-सम्पदाः।
अप्यल्प-बोधा अपरेबहु-श्रिु-महा-गणुााः॥15-134॥
15-134. Coming down to the other followers of the Great Acharya, there
were some, though less-versed in scriptural lore but imbued with deep
devotion and others though deficient in intellect filling this gap with frequent
hearings of avowed scriptures but one and all, all said and done, steeped in
faith and earnest devout.
बहवो गनृहणोऽप्यस्माि स् मग्रािग्रुहंरराः
ु।
दीप्रा रत्राग्नरा इव त्ररो नलकुच-शिे रााः॥15-135॥
15-135. Besides these ascetics, among the many householders who had the
good fortune to curry his blissful favour, were three distinguished devotees
of the Likucha family glittering like the three fires, the illustrious
Trivikramacharya, his brother Shankaracharya and another Shankaracharya
of the same clan.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 272

(It highlights the fact that not monks alone but befitting house-holders too are
entitled to Supreme knowledge.)
माध्वंनिरोगंरेप्रारो िात्यजि न्वदषांवरााः।
नशष्य-क्षत्रेषे ुसनिद्या-बीजावापैक-दीनक्षिााः॥15-136॥
115-136. These three celebrated (house-holder) scholars of the Likucha
family were dedicated primarily to the dissemination of enlightened
knowledge among their followers like a zealous farmer sowing unadulterated
seeds in the fields and successfully carried out their master’s mandate
‘propagate the paramountcy of Lord Vishnu in your sacred journey’.
ग्रामडरो ब्राह्मणाग्रडराः प्रापाः
ुपणूक्ष
े-नशष्यिाम।्
रषेांसद-्गनुप्त-मात्रणे भविे न्कल परंपदम॥्15-137॥
15-137. Not only house-holders but even heads of the villages belonging to
all varnas (castes) King Jayasimha heading the list, who by mere faithful
observance of their prescribed duties of protecting the virtuous and
punishing the vicious could attain happiness eternal, became the staunch
followers of the Acharya.
शश्रु षूा-पक्ष-पािाद्यैाः केभ्नश्चि क्ेवलं ददौ।
राम-नप्ररो-राम इव स्वांगनिंरोनग-दल
य
भाम॥्15-138॥
15-138. Madhwacharya, most dear to Lord Ramachandra, always in tune
with him, conferred supreme bliss (divine destination) hard to be gained
even by contemplative saints shorn of Lord’s Grace, on some eligible souls
being pleased with their unflinching faith in the Vaishnava doctrine, sincere
devotion, unflagging service to Lord Vishnu and their revered preceptor.
नशष्य-प्रनशष्यानिशरा ईदृशा रद-्दरोदराि।्
को िच्छे ेि स् लुभंभक्त्या िि-्पाद-सरु-पादपम॥्15-139॥
15-139. Realizing so far the efficacy and the might of his devout disciples
and their faithful followers, born of the blessings and divine mercy of the
Great Acharya, who on earth will not yearn for refuge in his immaculate feet
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 273

easily attainable with pure devotion which like the (kalpa-vriksha) wishfulfilling tree in heaven, can confer cherished fruits?
इत्थंसनद्भाः सनद्भरच्यो धरारांचक्रेवासंशषे शय्येशराि।े
ग्रामेवािाः
ै
पानविेकाडव-िीर्ैाः भक्त-प्रीत्या सन्मठेऽििू-भोधाः॥15-140॥
15-140. Poornaprajna adored thus by the virtuous abiding on earth, moved
by the ardent love of his devotees halted at the well-known monastery in the
village known as Tantrya, (during the Chaturmasya period) when Lord
Narayana rests on his soft bed (Shesha), hallowed by the breezes blowing
from the holy Kanvatirtha.
आिन्द-िीर्-य
भगविदिन्दे -नबम्बं
नवद्या-सधुा-नविि-कानन्त स-ुकानन्त-कान्तम।्
रैाः प्रैक्ष्यिात्र भव-िाप-शमार भक्तैाः
िद-्दास-दास्यमनप नकं ि ददानि पसंु
ाः॥15-141॥
15-141. (What need more be said of the inestimable greatness of the
celebrated Acharya when) even sincere service to those blessed souls who
beheld his countenance, charmingly luminous like the orb of the moon and
bedecked with the glory of extensive knowledge, could extinguish the woes
of worldly existence and slake the thirst for salvation (deliver the desired
objects)? Nay even devoted attendance on their disciples can destroy their
distress and yield their cherished desires.
इनि श्रीमत्कनव-कुल-निलक-नत्रनवक्रम-पनडििाचार-यसिु श्री-िारारण-पनडििाचार-यनवरनचिे
श्री-मध्व-नवजरे महा-काव्ये-आिन्दानङ्किे पञ्चदशाः सगाः
य
षोिषाः सग:
य[16-58]
साधभ्ु ो मध-ुमर्िानि-भनक्त-भाग्भ्ाः श्रौिभ्े ो नविि-मिमे ह
य
ाि-ुभावम।्
वदेान्तंस्वरनमव बध-मोक्ष-मलू ं व्याचष्ट स्फुटमर् कोऽनप कोनवदोऽत्र॥16-1॥
16-1. A learned one among the disciples of Madhwacharya on his own,
narrated the sacred soul-saving eminent glories of (his master)
Poornaprajna in such a lucid manner, as if he was giving an exposition of
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 274

Vedanta affording release from the bondage of Samsara to the virtuous
Vedic students devoted to Lord Narayana, the slayer of the demon Madhu.
गोमत्यास्तट-निकटेऽच्छ-कीनि-य
चन्द्रं
नवश्व-ज्ंनक्षनि-पनिरन्त्य-वण-य
जन्मा।
नविेष्टा श्रनुि-गणु-साधकं श्रिुीिां
वाचालो वचिमवुाच वानग्म-वरम
य ॥16 ् -2॥
16-2. A garrulous king born in Sudra family who detested the Vedas hurled a
challenge at the superbly eloquent Acharya shining like the moon with the
splendor of his fame, halting at a region near the bank of the Gomati River.
उन्मत्त-प्रलनपिवन्न िनद्ध मािं
रद ्वाक्यंव्यनभचरनि क्वनचि फ् लेऽत्र।
दृष्टन्तो भवनि िदप्रमाणिारां
सवष
े
ांश्रनुि-वचसांच सवर्
य नेि॥16-3॥
16-3. ‘If one sentence in the (inexhaustible) Vedas fails to be fruitful, it not
only becomes unauthoritative like the gibbering of a maniac but stands as a
glaring example to nullify the validity of Vedas in general.’
वदेोक्तं फलमलमाप्यिऽेनधकाराद ्
इत्यक्तोऽिि-ुमिसाऽभ्धत्त धिू
ाः
य।
रोग्रत्वेसनि ि नह दृश्रिऽेनधकारी
िािाः स्याि स् िर-नवषाणवि स् दनेि॥16-4॥
16-4. When Poornaprajna asserted that only the privileged few can enjoy the
fruits mentioned in the Vedas, the crafty king put forth a spacious argument:
‘Since no one, who can secure the cherished Vedic results, is to be seen, is
not the so called eligible person a myth like an ass’s comb?
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 275

आक्षपेंिमसहमाि उच्च-मािाः
सद्योऽसौ निज-कर-पल्लव-िरिे ।
आदार व्यिििु बीजमोषधीिां
सक्तू ेिाङ्कुर-दल-पष्पु -बीज-सनृष्टम॥16 ् -5॥
16-5. The highly self-reliant Poornaprajna not ready to brook with the king’s
defiance picked up green grams with his two lusty (sprout-like) hands and
chanted the Rigveda Sukta and with its (mantric) spell could generate the
sprout, leaf, fruit and grain in order, under his very nose.
व्याख्यािा निनश स कदाचि प्र-दीपे
स-ंशान्तेपिुरनप वाचराम्बभवू।
नशष्याि स्व् ाि प्रुु-करुणाम्बनुधनिज
य
ािेाः
अङ्गष्ठ
ु-स्फुट-ििरान्त-रोनचषैव॥16-6॥
16-6. Once, during his nocturnal discourse when the light went out, Acharya,
the Ocean of compassion, continued his lesson uninterrupted with the
radiance of the tip of the thumb-nail of his foot, to the surprise of his curious
students.
िीर्ार्
य ं
पर्ृ -ुिर-वप्र-पानि-वारां
धाराणांरर-सहि-क्षमांमहेक्षाः।
आिीिांदश-शि-पनुारत्यशक्त्या
प्रक्ष्ये ोचेनवफुल-नशलांक्वनचि स् मक्तु ाम॥16 ् -7॥
16-7. During his journey once, the All-knowing Acharya, seeing a huge rock
on the bank of a river carried by a thousand people to stop the rushing water
gushing from a lofty region but dropped down on the way their strength
being broken, made an enquiry.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 276

लोकािामपु-कृिरेकुिाः नशलेरं
निन्येिो इनि जििा जगाद ित्र।
ििेारो रनि-वर मािवा ि हीमां
भीमश्चनेदह रििेिरन्ने वनेि॥16-8॥
16-8. When the Acharya asked why the boulder was not borne to its
destination for the welfare of the public, the people explained: Oh, Foremost
Sage! No human being can lift (this huge stone) and carry it; nay, even if
Bheemasena attempts to do it, he may or may not succeed!
निन्येिांनगनरनमव वािरी-कृ िात्मा
लीलावि-्कर-कमलेि सोऽमलेि।
ित्रानप न्यनधि िराऽस्य सच्यू िऽेलं
िि ि्ङ्गुांििुनिकषाऽधिुाऽनप कम॥16 य -9॥
16-9. Madhwacharya carried with extreme ease the massive rock with his
saintly, lustrous hands and put it in its proper place near the Tungabhadra
river like the Gandhamadhana Mountain that he lifted in his former
incarnation as Hanuman which even to-day speaks of his heroic venture.
सङ्ािैरनधक-घिर
ै
लङ्कृिाध्वा
नशष्याणांरि-मिसामिुिे रषेाम।्
रत्रामा वसनि निर्ानवििे चन्द्राः
ित्रासौ सकल-मनिाः ससार नसधमु॥16 ् -10॥
16-10. Poornaprajna approached the sea on the Amavasya day. (When the
moon was with the sun) joined enroute by a vast multitude of hermits and
householder disciples, engaged in diverse discussions on scriptural topics.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 277

आर्द्ाङ्ग
य
ााः सपनद निमज्जिाि स् रस्यां
कडवस्य निज-वषृ भस्य वल्लभाराम।्
ित्राऽरि ि् र-नकरणोपराग-हेिोाः
ग्रामीणा अनप सकलााः स-बाल-वृद्धााः॥16-11॥
16-11. During the same hour, the inmates of the village Ekavata including
their young and old, rushed to the sea for a plunge during the Solar eclipse,
with their bodies wet after a dip in the holy pond, dear to the great sageKanva.
सवज्
य ंस-पनरजिंसमीक्षमाणााः पल्लु ाक्षााः नस्मि-वदिााः शभुा ििन्दाः।
दौमख्य
य
ु ंदधि उिापरेनिनिन्दाः िाऽश्चर
ं
िरमनप िि स्व् भाव-िन्त्रम॥16 ् -12॥
16-12. The sight of the Omniscient Acharya with his large retinue provided a
feast to the wide open eyes of the virtuous with a pleasant smile playing on
their faces while to the vicious, another opportunity to villify the master with
their distorted faces, surprisingly enough both faithful to their inherent
nature.
मा मि
ैंभवुि-गरुुं नवनिन्दित्थे ंनिभत्स्य
य
ाभ्पिनदवोत्तरङ्ग-हस्ताः।
सिोभी घि-घि-घोष-घोर-वषेाः सम्राी िल-दमिार नसधरुाजाः॥16-13॥
16-13. It seemed as if the Lord of the Sea being intensely agitated,
assuming a fierce form with his roaring waves, heightened speed and
resounding roar and roused resentment was reproaching the miscreants
thus: ‘Defame not the Acharya: Beware if you slander the preceptor of the
three worlds!’
सम्मोदाि ि् रळ-िरो र्द्ु
िानभगामी गाीर-स्वि-िनुिमाि स् -ुफेि-हासाः।
वीच्यङ्गैरनधक-िरनै
रहानधवले ं मध्वार प्रणनिनमव व्यधाि स् मर्द्ु
ाः॥16-14॥
16-14. The surging sea as if highly contented, bent low and briskly moved to
welcome Madhwacharya, approaching the shore, with limbs in the form of its
mounting waves with a panegyric sung in a solemn tone by its tossing
billows and pleasing smile pictured by its chaste mass of foam.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 278

गो-लीलास्वनिशनरिावगाध-भावाि िोल्लङ्घ्ौ नवनवध ् -गणु-प्रकाश-रत्ौ।
मध्वाब्धी परम-मिाःे नप्ररंजिािांलावडरंि िुजलधरेरंनवशषेाः॥16-15॥
16-15. The Ocean and the Acharya though exemplars in solemnity of
temper, in depth and dignity, in irresistibility of vigor and unexcelled in their
sport with water and words respectively, yet the main (sea) the mine of
variegated jewels and the Acharya the Ocean of supreme virtues had this
difference that the charm of the Acharya’s face fascinated the folk while the
salinity of the sea repelled them.
अाोधिे नरि-िरोमी-पानण-मष्टृ ेस्वच्छेऽसौ नवकट-िटासिेनिषडणाः।
व्याचख्यावनि-नचरमि
ै
ररे -शािा-सक्तू ानि प्रभरुनि-सन्दु र-प्रकारम॥16 ् -16॥
16-16. The able Acharya discoursed for a long time, in an excellent style on
the Aitareya Suktas resting on the seat provided by the spacious shore of
the sea, swept clean by its hands in the form of its fleeting billows.
गााीराि
य
स्व् िमधरीकरोनि नसधोाः श्राव्यत्वं वहनि िर्ाऽप्यहो स्विोऽस्य।
पणून्द
े -प्रभ-वदिाः क एष धन्यो मत्वत्थे ंजि-जलनधस्तमाशुपरि
ै॥16 ् -17॥
16-17. The solemnity of the voice of Acharya Madhwa excelled the dignified
roar of the sea, yet surprisingly enough was sonorous to hear. A multitude
thronged around him in no time curious to know the identity of this blessed
person beaming with a moon-like face.
वदेािांसमनुचि-भाव-वाद-दक्षं
रेवदे-निषमीममनूचरेमहेष्यााः
य।
नधग-्नधक्िानिनि जििा जगाद ित्र
स्वाश्चराि
य न्कल कनलिाञ्जनलिम
य
न्ती॥16-18॥
16-18. The gentry gathered on the shore of the sea startled by his strange
discourses, bent low with folded hands and greatly incensed against his
critics, cried out ‘woe to those intensely jealous who brand Poornaprajna,
expert in expounding the import of the Vedas, as its slanderer’.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 279

सन्नामंनवफुल-हृदेनवधार भक्त्या
नबभ्राणाश्चरण-रजाः सरुन्द्रे -सव्ये म।्
िि-्स्नािादनधक-शचुौ िदानध-राजे
सस्नस्तु ेनिज-निकरााः प्रशस्त-काले॥16-19॥
16-19. The host of Brahmins paid their homage marked with deep devotion
and bore the dust of the feet of the Great Acharya, worthy to be served by
the Gods and took their plunge in the ocean sanctified the more by his
(Acharya’s) dip.
कल्लोलै कनर-निकरैनरवानिवारैाः
उल्लोलज
ै
ि
य -निकराि न्िपािरनद्भाः।
आ-क्रान्तााः प्रबल-िरैश्च लोठ्यमािा
हास्यत्वं प्र-रररुुदन्विीह िक
ैे॥16-20॥
16-20. The people bathing the sea that were swept off their feet and rolled
on the ground, distressed by the severe lashes of its untrammeled, vigorous,
undulating waves facing them like a herd of elephants, became butts of
ridicule.
मज्जन्तंपर्ृ -ुलहनर-निगढू-मनूि
ं
सम्पणू -यप्रमनिमसज्जिो जहास।
रो लोक-त्रर-नवजरी गरुु
ाः प्रनसद्धाः
सोऽरंही पिनि लघनूम-य
लीलरनेि॥16-21॥
16-21. ‘Alas, the renowned Guru, the vanquisher of the three worlds is
knocked down tossed by tiny waves,’so twitted the base people seeing the
body of Poornaprajna ducked in the mounting waves.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 280

िीचािामवच-वचास्यं जीगणन्नो
दभ्राणांक्षनुभि-कराडरदभ्र-बोधाः।
क्रोष्ट
ू
िांश्व-कल-कल-प्रदंनवरावं
पञ्चास्यो ि नह गणरदेदार-वीराः
य॥16-22॥
16-22. Poornaprajna slighted the light tongues of the felons that can hurt the
innocent, like a dignified brave lion undaunted by the howls of a jackal that
can only frighten and make a dog bark.
जन्म-नस्थत्यवनसनि-दानरिंकटाक्षं
लोकािामघटरदम्बधुौ बहृ द-्धीाः।
आक्रान्तोऽनधक-गरुुणा स ििे िावि ्
मञ्चुि स् ञ-्चलिमभिू ि्टाक-दश्ेराः॥16-23॥
16-23. The (potential) side-glance of Madhwacharya, (the incarnation of the
would-be creator) that creates, sustains and destroys the inmates of the
universe, subdued the angry ocean into a still lake.
इत्याद्यैरनप चनरिैरिन्य-साध्यैाः
ि स्थष्ठेांबहु-मनिमाप दजि
य ोऽनस्मि।्
नव-िेषंव्यनधि पिुनिर
य
स्त-भाग्रे
िनस्मि द्मि
य नस िदवे शोभिंस्याि॥16 ् -24॥
16-24. Inspite of the herculean achievements, unattainable by others, the
vicious people could not develop any solid esteem for the Acharya but
spurned him, unfortunate as they were, in keeping with their tamasic nature.
स-ंप्राप्तंसह सह-जिे गडि-वाटं
स्वोजस्स-ं प्रकटि आनदशद ्नव-शङ्कम।्
शश्रु षूामरमनुचिो नवधािमुीषि ्
लोकािानमनि वचसा परीक्षकाणाम॥16 ् -25॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 281

16-25. On the report of the people (intending to test his might) that Gandavat
who had arrived with his brother was the right person to serve him,
Madhwacharya unhesitatingly advised him to display his sturdiness.
श्रीकान्तश्वे र-सदिऽेिरि न्कलक
ै ो
रनिशं न्नर-वर-िीि-केि-ुरनष्टम।्
आहत्या गरुु-गदरव
ै
िानळकेराद ्
रो लेभेिरळ-िराि फ् लानि कामम॥16 ् -26॥
16-26. A heavy banner-post was wafted all alone by this Gandavat in
Srikanteshwar temple and a coconut tree was briskly rocked with the knock
of a light mace to shake down its fruits to his heart’s content.
एिादृग-्बल-नवभवाः स िस्य कडठं
िज्ज्यष्ठेोऽप्यनभि उभौ समंगहृ ीत्वा।
निष्पष्टेम
ु
प्रममवापिाः
ुप्ररत्ं
सङ्षाि
य
क्र् म-पनरवधम
य
ाि-िक्ष्ण्य
ै
म॥16 ् -27॥
16-27. The physical giants (Mini-Samsons) Gandavat and his brother put
their hands simultaneously round the neck (of Madhwacharya) and the more
strenuously they strived to stifle, (to their dismay) the sterner and stiffer it
grew.
आनस्वन्नावलस-िरौ गरुोनिर
य ोगाि ्
छत्राग्र्यानिल-मनहिौ च िावभुाभ्ाम।्
मक्त्वु ाऽराः कनठि-िर-त्वचंनशरोनधं
परार
य -स्फुट-वचिांनि-पिेिाः
ुकौ॥16-28॥
16-28. Gandavat and his brother that were wearied and were heavily
sweating even though served by two stout disciples fanning them, (and
under instructions of the Acharya) in getting a firm grip of his stiff and
metallic neck that still voiced distinct words in an orderly way, slowly sank
and dropped on the ground.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 282

आश्वस्तौ शनुच-हृनदमावििू-मािौ
उद्धि
ं
ुसमगददङ्गन
ु
लंधरा-स्थाम।्
सङ्गृह्य प्रसभ-रसादनप प्ररत्तौ
सामथ्य
ं
ररिनुरमौ ि कम्पिऽेस्यााः॥16-29॥
16-29. Finding them recovered with rest, yet bloated with boast, the holy
Acharya (put them to shame) by directing them, at least, to lift his finger
placed on the ground which they could not even move with their collected
might.
निरत्
य ंवट
ु
मनध-रुह्य मन्द-हासी
स प्रारानदह पनरिो िनृसहं -गहेम।्
ऐश्वरनै
रनि लनघमानदक
ै
रुपिेो
मध्वोऽभिू न्त्रभवुि-नचत्र-रत्-राजाः॥16-30॥
16-30. Madhwacharya, endowed with the power of Laghima and the like
went round the temple of Lord Narasimha with a gentle smile, lightly borne
by a celibate on his back and came to be reckoned as a ‘Wonderful ruby’, a
prodigy of prodigies in the three worlds.
पञ्चाशन्नर-प-िरोपिीि-मात्रां
रो वाक्षीं गहृ मनध-रोनहणीं नििार।
स व्याख्या-स्वर-दमिार पवू-यवाटो
निदश
े
ाद ्व्यनधि गरुोगळ
य -प्रपषेम॥16 ् -31॥
16-31. The able bodied Purvavat who carried home singlehanded the heavy
wooden ladder borne strenuously by fifty men of the king, being directed by
Madhwacharya to restrain the tone of his sermons, tried hard to squeeze his
(the Acharya’s) neck.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 283

नस्वन्नऽेनस्मन्ननप रिमाि आग्रहोग्रे
प्राच्याि ि्ि-्प्रवचि निस्विोऽनि-रजे ।े
उद्धि
ं
ुनवफुल-हृदङ्गल
ु
ीं च िालं
सोऽभनूदत्यजनि कुिहूलंजिािाम॥16 ् -32॥
16-32. The people were startled to see the ruthless and head strong
Purvavat only perspiring heavily, however hard he tried to choke his voice
albeit without success and the Acharya’s discourses became more spirited
and resonant and the miserable Purvavat failed to lift even a finger of his
(Acharya’s) sturdy hand (placed on the ground).
परनै
क्ष प्रभनुरिराः
ैनशवानग्न-पवू
ाः
ै
िोपैनक्ष प्रबल-िरैस्तर्ा प्ररत्ैाः।
िावनै
क्ष क्वनचदनप शक्त्यपनूिर
यनस्मि ्
उि-्प्रनै
क्ष स्वरमनप भीम इत्यवश्रम॥16 ् -33॥
16-33. When the crucial tests of the renowned wrestlers Sivagni and his like
were parried by the puissant Madhwacharya and their severe efforts proved
inefficacious and when they failed to trace any defect in his (Acharya’s) steel
frame, they divined that he must be none other than the invincible
Bheemasena in (another) form.
लेनिन्यांमहुुरनप-िह्य कृष्यमाणं
िाप्यकें िि-ुरुहमस्य िदूपानट।
िासाग्रेमृदनि कृिश्च
ै
मनुष्ट-घािैाः
िास्यन्दे ोरनि-बनलनभाः प्रसन्निाऽऽनस॥16-34॥
16-34. The strong and sturdy among them could neither pluck a hair from his
body even when they tried to pull vigorously with tongs time and again nor
perturb the composure of his moon-like face even with fierce fist-blows on
the soft tip of his nose.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 284

पञ्चास्याः श्वनभनरव ही नवहीि-सारैाः
अाोनधिग
य -सनरिांजलनै
रवाल्पाः
ै।
िद्योिनै
रव िरनणनवि
य
म्बरि िॄ ्ि ्
प्रत्यनर्-य
स्व-सम-िरव्य
ै
व
य
ाहरि स् ाः॥16-35॥
16-35. Madhwacharya (Mukhyaprana in human embodiment) imitated the
human beings and treated the devotees (Satwik), the opponents (Tamasic)
and the indifferent (Rajasic) people according to their deserts in like manner
as an ocean deals with the rivers (gliding down the mountains), as the lion
handles the weak dogs and the Sun meets the moths respectively.
पारन्ती-सरु-सदिंनवशाल-सनंवि ्
स-ंप्राप्ताः िलु स-ुनचरानन्नवद्ये -हीिम।्
ग्राम्याग्र्य-नक्षनि-पनिनभनदि
ि
ाध-य
मात्राि ्
िद-्भिूीव्यनय
धि स-भिू-बल्यिल्पााः॥16-36॥
16-36. Poornaprajna reached the Paranti temple (known as Kevudadel) and
knowing that it did not avail of the religious rights including the offerings of
eatables for a pretty long-time, restored the regular rules of worship and
festivities including oblations to all created beings, in consultation with the
chieftain of the village and the king of that region within a brief interval of
twelve hours.
भीमत्वेसह सरजाः
ै
प्रनिनष्ठिाः प्राक्
पञ्चात्मा मरु-नरपरुनञ्चिो रदत्र।
पाञ्चाल्या बनल-सनललंसमंददत्या
सोऽस्माषीि ि्नमममर् प्रपज्यू -पज्यू
ाः॥16-37॥
16-37. The worshipful Acharya (incarnation of Lord Vayu), adores even by
Mahesha and others, called to memory the installation of Pancharupi Murari
(Narayana in an aggregate of five forms) in that place in his former
incarnation as Bheemasena in company with his brothers (Dharmaraja and
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 285

others) and his ritual of worship along with (his consort) Droupadi including
offering of water to all created beings.
आरास्यि न्कल सनरदन्तराख्य-दशे ं
ग्रीष्मेनिजल
य नमह शश्रुवुास्तं टाकम।्
िि-्कालेपरमनभ-वषर
य
ि घ् िौघं
िि-्पत्यू
ै
व्यनधि कुिहूलंजिािाम॥16 ् -38॥
16-38. Arriving at a region called Idetude in summer and listening to the
report that the village tank had gone dry, the celebrated Acharya instantly
created a cluster of clouds to pour rain enough to fill the pond, to the sheer
amazement the people present.
दमन्त्र
य
ाः
ै
िल-पटलैाः प्र-चोद्यमािो
ग्रामशे ो वषृ ळ-पनिाः प्र-हिम
य
ुिेम।्
स-ंप्राप्तस्ति उि रान्तमीक्षमाणाः
प्रोद्यन्तंरनवनमव नवनस्मिो ििाम॥16-39॥
16-39. The Shudra Chieftain, the Lord of the village incited by the evil
designs of a vile caucus to slay the Mahatma, bamboozled by his brilliance
vying with the splendor of the Sun, lay prostrate before him.
क्षत्रेाग्र्यंनत्रभवुि-वैद्य-िार्-िार्ं
प्रस्थार प्रचरु-िरान्तराः प्रभावी।
श्री-कृ ष्णामृि-परमाणव
य
ानभधािां
चक्रेसिचि-िनिंस्व-भक्त-भत्यू
ाः
ै॥16-40॥
16-40. The mighty Madhwacharya departed to Kokkad, a fine village famous
for the temple of Dhanvantri adored by the Physicians of the three worlds
and composed his remarkable treatise Sri Krishnamruta-Maharnava, a
treasure of words of wisdom culled from various Puranas, (for the welfare of
his devotee Edepadittaya).
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 286

स ग्रामंपरमनप राि उच्च-भनूिं
नविासं ाः क्व कुहर-कूप-ददयराभााः।
इत्यचू ेमदमनिमानििोऽनिलज्म-्
मन्यस्य क्षपनरिमुवे िज्जिस्य॥16-41॥
16-41. The Acharya then moved on to another village Ujjire by name and
enquired the whereabouts of the vain-glorious wise, who like frogs in a deep
well labored under the delusion of omniscience, to pull down their huffed up
hates.
सव-यज्ोऽप्यरमनधकं ि रज्-भङ्गीं
स-ं नवत्तेरनिनरनि बद्ध-निश्चरोऽसौ।
आ-भान्तंपनरषनद मत्सरादपच्छृ ि ्
कमार्
य -य
श्रनुि-गहिार्-य
िडि-भावम॥16 ् -42॥
16-42. The village pundits firmly convinced that Madhwacharya though
omniscient, being a Sanyasi may not be fully cognizant of the methodology
of sacrifices, enquired of him, shining in the assembly, the import of the
esoteric section of the Veda (brahmanas) concerned with the Karma-Shrutis.
छन्दोभ्श्च्यिु-रस-सङ्ग्रह-प्रवीणाि ्
षष्ठऽेनि प्रनि-नवनहिाि प्र्जानिपिे।
िाराशस्यं चरम-चारु-मन्त्र-भदेाि ्
ऊचऽेसौ िमनभ-दधद ्नव-सशं राशं ाः॥16-43॥
16-43. Without the least shred of uncertainty (beyond doubt) Poornaprajna
explained the portion of the Veda in question and apprised them of the
significance of the distinctive sacred hymns including the fascinating Nara
Samsi Vedic Mantra, recited by the Brahman, a Ritwik on the 6th day of the
ritual.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 287

पानडित्यंपरममवत्ये िस्य िादृक्
सङ्षाि
य
क्ष् नुभि-मिा नवपक्ष-सङ्ाः।
िार्ाः
य
स्यादरनमनि वणर
य
न्नर् त्वं
िंब्रहूीत्यरुुमनििनेरिोऽर्द्वद ्र्द्ाक॥16 ् -44॥
16-44. Discerning the unmatched erudition of Poornaprajna the clique of
rival disputants whose minds were agitated by heated contests
complained: This is not the correct interpretation’. The Acharya unruffled
said, ‘Well, then, you give out the exact explanation’. This counter-challenge
put the hostile camp to hasty flight.
सोऽपच्छृ ि ि्मर् महाह्वरोपसगा
य
रत्रोक्ता मि-ुचरणोपसृज्य-रपााः।
िस्यार्
ं
वचि-चरस्य िंब्रवुाणाः
स्थर
ै
ार्
य ं
सपनद स लेिरा-ं बभवू॥16-45॥
16-45. The run-aways emboldened again, to disarm Poornaprajna, asked
him to expatiate on that portion of the Brahmana which elaborates the
Mahanamni Rk with its five limbs read in conjunction with relevant Padas.
Acharya with ease brilliantly expounded the meaning of the portion of the
Mahanamni Riks and other Padas that are to be read together.
सम्पणू
ं
शनशिनमवोनदिंकृशाः श्वा
चक्षुोभाशभु-निकरो निरीक्ष्य मध्वम।्
प्रत्यर्ी स्वरनमनि दूरवोऽनभधावि ्
नकं ििे क्षिममिृ ाकरस्य िस्य॥16-46॥
16-46. Beholding Anandatirtha, their adversary in disputation lustrous like
the full moon, the fell folk quaked with fear and scuttled away like feeble
dogs scampering in the weariness howling from afar mistaking the moon as
their foe. What (harm) could be done by them to the Acharya who bestows
bliss or to the moon the very source of nectar?
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 288

निस्वािांकनिपर-भनुक्त-रक्तु -भक्तं
भक्तािांव्यनधि चिगुण
य
ु ंदरालुाः।
भिूेस्म नत्र-दश-िरोप-भोग्रमन्नं
स-ंप्रीत्यै स धि-विांबहृ ि-्प्रबोधाः॥16-47॥
16-47. The gracious Madhwacharya redoubled the food offered by the
indigent which could suffice only for a few of his followers. To gratify the
affluent, Pituman (Lord Vayu), Madhwacharya consumed the fare that could
cater for thirty mouths.
वष्ट्यृ ादाःे स नि-रमिानद चक्र एिि ्
नचत्रंनकं भवुि-निरामकेसमीर।े
आप्यवेंभवुि-गरुोाः कृिािवुादाः
कृत्यषे ुप्रवर इिीह वणरामाः
य ॥16-48॥
16-48. It is no surprise that Madhwacharya, the incarnation of Mukhyaprana
who regulates the universe, performed some super-human miracles like
pouring rains at will. Yet these are described with a pious feeling that the
narration of the extraordinary deeds of the preceptor of the world is one’s
supreme duty in life.
इत्यचू ेधरनण-सरुणे केवलं िो
माध्वीरंनवनवध-कर्ा कर्ासुमान्यााः।
साक्षादप्यमर-वररु
ै
दीरम
य
ाणा
गधवद्य
ै-य
ुसदनस िन्मदुेजगऽेसौ॥16-49॥
16-49. The diverse life-glories of the most revered and majestic
Madhwacharya, were recounted not only by the Brahmin disciples but were
openly narrated by the supreme Gods and were sung by the Gandharwas in
divine councils for their delight.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 289

िांपद्य-प्रनण-गनदिांिुमछू
यनरत्वा
िािािामनुचि-िराऽऽत्त-पञ्चमाद्यााः।
गाधारंद्य-ुनवषरमज्ज्वु लंसजृ न्तो
ग्रामंिेप्र-जगरुकानक-कम्र-कडठााः॥16-50॥
16-50. The Gandharwas gifted with melodic voice free from Kaki Blemish,
producing the glorious Gandhara-sound-groups and in tune with Panchama
and Sapta-swaras, chanted in succession the God-spun poetized biography,
in a perfect metrical style fit to be heard in celestial assemblies.
आिम्राः
ै
स-ुमकुुट-मौनलनभाः कराग्रैाः
आिाम्रैाः प्रनि-कनलिाः
ैनस्मिम
ै
ि
य
ु ाब्जाः
ै।
आश्रानव नस्थरिर-भनक्तनभाः सरुन्द्रे ाः
ै
िद-्गीिा दश-नधषणार-य
वर-य
चरा॥य 16-51॥
16-51. The prominent Gods, with precious crowned heads and folded rubytipped hands, with blooming lotus-like faces and pleasing smiles listened to
the sweet songs on the saga of the Greatest Acharya, with modesty and
stead-fast devotion.
गीवाण
य नै
वज
य
र-महोत्सवस्य पजू ां
कुवाण
य
र
ैनवरळ-सनंवदस्तदािीम।्
नव-स्मरेम
ैनय
ुि-निकरोप-दवे-रक्तु
ै
ाः
स-ुस्मरेर
ै
र् िमवनेक्षिंुप्र-जग्म॥16 े -52॥
16-52. These deities with their pleasant smiles, adoring the victory-festivities
of Poornaprajna moved on in amazement accompanied by sages and
Gandharwas to behold Madhwacharya.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 290

आदश
ं
गणु-गण-दशि
य ेमरुाराःे
सच्छािंरनचिमििे वणर
य
न्ताः।
प्रद्योिरु
ै
ि
ु-पदवीं प्र-काशरन्ताः
प्रक्ष
ै
न्त प्रचरु-मिो-नवलासमिे॥16 े -53॥
16-53. These Gods blazing the empyrean (course of stars) with their
effulgence, beholding the graceful personality of Poornaprajna, extolled the
soundness of his Shastra which reflects like a mirror the congeries of the
auspicious attributes of Lord Narayana.
िाकीन्द्रास्तमवनि-भागमा-वसन्तं
स-ुश्लोक
ै
रनप भवुिानि भषूरन्तम।्
िमेाः
ुिादप-निषदंिदि
ै
ररे ीं
व्याख्यान्तंनवनवध-नवनशष्ट-नशष्य-मध्य॥16 े -54॥
16-54. The renowned Gods humbly bowed to the revered Acharya who
adorns the world with his immaculate fame now inhabiting that portion of the
earth, seated in the midst of different distinguished disciples, expounding the
secrets of the Aitareya Upanishad.
श्रीमन्तंशनश-वदिंकुशशे राक्षं
गाीर-स्वरमनि-नदव्य-लक्षणाढ्म।्
पश्रन्ताः स्व-गरुुमिानचच
य
ि क्ृिार्ा
य
वाडरा िंहनर-रनि-पणू -य
काममिे॥16 े -55॥
16-55. These Gods, seeing their own dignified, lotus-eyed preceptor, with his
moon-like face and solemn voice, enriched with thirty-two divine marks of
excellence, contented enough with his stead-fast devotion to Lord Narayana,
regarded themselves as highly blessed and worshipped him with hymns
profuse.
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 291

अहरो दरागम-िमाः स्व-गो-गणैाः
अकरोमक
य
ुुन्द-गणु-वृन्द-दशि
य
म।्
अजरश्चिदुश
य
जगनन्त सद-्गणु
ाः
ै
शरणंगरुो करुणराऽनप िो भवाःे॥16-56॥
16-56. Your cogent interpretation (putting together of words) has dispelled
the darkness of the corrupt Shastras. You have presented well-nigh, the
whole gamut of the Lord’s auspicious attributes. You surpass the fourteen
worlds in superiority of merit (like Vishnu-Bhakti). Oh Venerable Guru, out of
sheer compassion be our savior (Chief Resort). (A beautiful description of
the exploits of our Acharya.)
िमस्तेप्राणशे प्रणि-नवभवारावनिमगा
िमाः स्वानमि र्ाम-नप्ररिम हिमूि ग् रुु-गणु।
िमस्तभ्ु ंभीम प्रबल-िम कृष्णष्टे भगवि ्
िमाः श्रीमि मध्व प्रनदश सदृुशंिो जर-जर॥16-57॥
16-57. O Lord of the Senses, accept our humble and hearty salutations. (in
your three embodiments) you have descended on the earth to bestow the
wealth of the highest glories of life on the righteous ones who salute you in
total surrender. Obeisance to you, Master Hanuman, the bosom of exquisite
virtues, most dear to Sri Ramachandra. Salutations to you, illustrious
Bheemasena, the most potent and Supreme, the very life-breath of Sri
Krishna. Respectful adorations to you, Acharya Madhwa, the mine of lore
infinite. Enlighten us with wisdom.
Let victory crown you! Let success smile on you!
इनि नि-गनदिवन्तस्तत्र वन्दृ ारकेन्द्रा
गरुु-नवजर-महं िंलाळरन्तो महान्तम।्
ववषृ रुनिल-दृश्रंपष्पु -वारंस-ुगधं
हनर-दनरि-वनरष्ठेश्रीमदािन्द-िीर्॥16 े -58॥
TOC http://srimadhvyasa.wordpress.com/ https://sites.google.com/site/srimadhvyasa/
आचारााःय श्रीमदाचारााःय सन्तुमेजन्म जन्मनि॥गरुुभावंव्यञ्जरनन्त भानि श्री जरिीर्वय ाक्॥कृष्णंवन्देजगद्गरुुम ॥् Page 292

16-58. Praying thus, the gods Indra and others gathered in the sky and
rained on him heaps of flowers to the witness of all, to celebrate the triumphs
of the blessed Anandatirtha, the pre-eminent among the votaries of Lord
Narayana.
इनि श्रीमत्कनव-कुल-निलक-नत्रनवक्रम-पनडििाचार-यसिु श्री-िारारण-पनडििाचार-यनवरनचिे
श्री-मध्व-नवजरे महा-काव्ये-आिन्दानङ्किे षोिशाः सगाः
य
